https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574789110001274
Introduction

Implementation of screening/prevention programs and novel
treatment strategies is decreasing breast cancer mortality
(Jemal et al., 2009). However, more than 120,000 estimated
deaths due to breast cancer are expected annually in the US
and Europe combined (Jemal et al., 2009; La Vecchia et al.,
2009). A plausible explanation for this scenario is, in part,
that we still lack a complete enough picture of the biologic
heterogeneity of breast cancers with respect to molecular
alterations, treatment sensitivity, and cellular composition.
Importantly, this complexity is not entirely reflected by
the main clinical parameters (age, node status, tumor size,

histological grade) and pathological markers (estrogen receptor [ER], progesterone receptor [PR] and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 [HER2]), all of which are routinely
used in the clinic to stratify patients for prognostic predictions
and to select treatments.
Studies based on global gene expression analyses have provided additional insights into this complex scenario. During
the last 10 years, four molecular ‘intrinsic’ subtypes of breast
cancer (Luminal A, Luminal B, HER2-enriched, and Basal-like)
and a Normal Breast-like group have been identified and
intensively studied (Perou et al., 2000; Sorlie et al., 2001).
Known as the ‘intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer’, these groups
of tumors have revealed critical differences in incidence

* Corresponding author. Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, 450 West Drive, CB7295, Chapel Hill,
NC 27599, USA. Tel.: þ1 919 843 5740; fax: þ1 919 843 5718.
E-mail address: cperou@med.unc.edu (C.M. Perou).
1574-7891/$ e see front matter ª 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.003

6


(Millikan et al., 2008; Carey et al., 2006), survival (Perou et al.,
2000; Sorlie et al., 2001; Cheang et al., 2009; Hu et al., 2006),
and response to treatment (Prat et al., 2010; Nielsen et al.,
2010; Parker et al., 2009b; Hugh et al., 2009; Carey et al., 2007;
Rouzier et al., 2005a). Importantly, the information provided
by the intrinsic subtypes complements and expands the information provided by classical clinical-pathological markers
(Parker et al., 2009b).
As genomic studies evolve, further sub-classification of
breast tumors into new molecular entities is expected to
occur. For example, a new breast cancer intrinsic subtype,
known as Claudin-low, has been recently identified in human
tumors, in mouse tumors (Herschkowitz et al., 2007), and in
a panel of breast cancer cell lines (Prat et al., 2010). Clinically,
the majority of Claudin-low tumors are poor prognosis
ER-negative (ER), PR-negative (PR), and HER2-negative
(HER2) (i.e. triple-negative) invasive ductal carcinomas with
a high frequency of metaplastic and medullary differentiation. Preliminary data shows that they have a response rate
to standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy that is intermediate
between Basal-like and Luminal tumors (Prat et al., 2010).
Furthermore, Claudin-low tumors are enriched with unique
biologic properties linked to mammary stem cells (MaSCs)
(Lim et al., 2009), a Core EMT signature (Taube et al., 2010),
and show features of tumor initiating cells (TICs, also known
as Cancer Stem Cells [CSCs]) (Creighton et al., 2009;
Hennessy et al., 2009), the study of which is leading to the formulation of new hypothesis regarding the ‘cell of origin’ of the
different subtypes of breast cancers.
In this review, we comprehensively deconstruct the molecular portraits of breast cancer in three steps. First, we describe
the molecular features of the Claudin-low subtype in human
tumors and cell lines. Second, we discuss the main clinicalpathological characteristics and treatment sensitivity of the
intrinsic subtypes. Finally, we review the CSC hypothesis
and the potential developmental origin of each intrinsic
subtype.

2.
Molecular identification and characterization of
the Claudin-low intrinsic subtype
In 2007, Herschkowitz et al. (2007) analyzed 232 human breast
samples by semi-unsupervised hierarchical clustering and
compared their gene expression profiles versus 108 mammary
tumors from multiple genetically engineered mouse models.
In this report, a potential new intrinsic subtype, apparent in
both mouse and human data sets, was identified; this ‘Claudin-low’ subtype was characterized by the low expression of
genes involved in tight junctions and cellecell adhesion, including three different Claudin genes. Interestingly, most of
the defining characteristics of the Claudin-low human tumors
were conserved in several mouse models including 3 models
with engineered BRCA1 and/or p53 deficiencies.
Recently, we have reported a more comprehensive characterization of this rare intrinsic subtype (Prat et al., 2010). As
shown in Figure 1A, hierarchical clustering analysis of 320
human breast tumors and 17 normal breast samples using
a w1900 gene intrinsic list (Parker et al., 2009b) places the
Claudin-low group next to the Basal-like subtype indicating

that both tumor types share some gene expression features.
These shared features include low expression of the HER2
and the luminal gene clusters, as well as the genes HER2,
ESR1, GATA3 and the luminal keratins 8 and 18. However,
two intrinsic gene clusters are uniquely expressed (or not
expressed) in the Claudin-low subtype. One of these clusters
is enriched with cellecell adhesion proteins and is found to
show low expression within Claudin-low tumors. Among the
w20 genes that compose this cluster are claudin 3, 4, 7, cingulin and occludin that are involved in tight junctions, and
E-cadherin that is a calcium dependent cell adhesion protein.
Conversely, the other cluster, which is composed of w40
genes, is highly enriched with immune system response
genes and is highly expressed in Claudin-low samples. Many
of these genes are known to be expressed by T- and B-lymphoid cells (i.e. CD4 and CD79a), indicating high immune cell
infiltration in this tumor subtype. However, the origin of other
immune-related genes highly expressed in Claudin-low
tumors, such as interleukin 6 or CXCL2 might be produced
by the actual tumor cells, or immune cells, or both (see below).
Two additional intrinsic gene clusters have characteristic
levels of expression in Claudin-low tumors. The proliferation
gene cluster, which is usually highly expressed by poor outcome subtypes such as Basal-like, HER2-enriched and Luminal B tumors, is expressed at low levels in almost all
Claudin-low samples, although it does not reach the low
levels observed in the Luminal A or Normal Breast-like groups
(Prat et al., 2010). This data suggests that Claudin-low tumors
might be slow cycling tumors. Conversely, a cluster composed
of w80 genes and highly enriched with mesenchymal/extracellular matrix genes (i.e. laminin and integrin alpha 7) is
highly expressed in Claudin-low tumors with a pattern of
expression similar to the Normal Breast-like group, which is
not unexpected since normal breast samples are highly
enriched with stromal tissue.
It is important to note that the Normal Breast-like group in
our studies has always contained many true normal breast
samples (typically reduction Mammoplasty samples), with
the PAM50 Normal Breast-like group being trained using
only true normals (Parker et al., 2009b). The small number of
tumors that fall into the Normal Breast-like group with the
true normals, show low tumor cellularity (<50%) when examined pathologically, which likely explains why they group
with the true normal samples (Parker et al., 2009b;
Peppercorn et al., 2008). Other studies have questioned the
existence of this subtype based upon analyses of data sets
that typical contain no true normal samples, which depending
upon the rigor of pathology quality control over % tumor cellularity, may result in only a handful of tumor samples showing this phenotype; thus, those proposing to assess the
existence of this group must include true normal samples in
their analyses, and when a tumor sample falls into this group
it does so mostly likely because that sample is predominant
composed of normal breast tissue and not tumor tissue. However, future larger studies such as The Cancer Genome Atlas
project will address the existence of a normal-like breast
tumor subtype.
The pattern of expression of the main intrinsic gene clusters across the molecular portraits of breast cancers reveals
that the Claudin-low tumors are characterized by two main

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

Figure 1 e Intrinsic hierarchical clustering and selected gene expression patterns of 337 UNC breast samples data set (publicly available at
GSE18229 and https://genome.unc.edu). (A) Average-linkage hierarchical clustering of genes and arrays was performed using the intrinsic gene
list from Parker et al. (2009b), with the sample associated dendrogram colored according to intrinsic subtype. Characteristic expression patterns are
highlighted including the Luminal, HER2, Basal, Immune, Cell adhesion, Mesenchymal/Extracellular matrix (ECM) and Proliferation gene
clusters. Each colored square represents the relative transcript abundance (in log2 space) with highest expression being red, average expression
being black, and lowest expression being green. (B) Mesenchymal and stem cell-like gene expression in Claudin-low tumors shown using ANOVA
analysis for each subtype. The Stem Cell-like Signature (CD44D/PROCRD vs. CD24D) was obtained from Shipitsin et al. (2007), and
a enrichment/activity score was derived by calculating the inner product of this signature (gene ratio) and the gene expression value of each tumor
sample. (C) DNA-repair (PARP1 and CHEK1) and angiogenesis (VEGFA) gene expression for individual genes across the subtypes.

7

8

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

features: high mesenchymal features and low luminal/
epithelial differentiation. Interestingly, previous reports
have linked both of these features by showing that the induction of a mesenchymal state in a mammary epithelial cell
(also known as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition [EMT])
is associated with the acquisition of undifferentiated mammary stem cell-like features (Taube et al., 2010; Morel et al.,
2008; Gupta et al., 2009; Shipitsin et al., 2007; Mani et al.,
2008). For example, expression of EMT-inducing transcription
factors like SNAI1 (Mani et al., 2008), or repression of E-cadherin (Gupta et al., 2009) in mammary epithelial cells, causes
a fibroblast-like appearance with induction of mesenchymal
markers such as N-cadherin and/or vimentin. In addition,
cells in this EMT state acquire a CD44þ/CD24/low stem celllike antigenic phenotype (Gupta et al., 2009; Al-Hajj et al.,
2003), which has been previously found to enrich for CSCs
(Gupta et al., 2009; Al-Hajj et al., 2003; Li et al., 2008). Indeed,
EMT-inducing transcription factors such as ZEB2 and TWIST2,
as well as the mesenchymal marker vimentin, are expressed
at higher levels in CD44þCD24/low CSCs and CD49fhigh/
EpCAM mammary stem cells (MaSCs) relative to the more
differentiated CD44/CD24þ tumor cells and CD49f/EpCAMþ
mature luminal cells, respectively (Shipitsin et al., 2007;
Prat and Perou, 2009).
Concordant with a mesenchymal/stem cell-like state, Claudin-low tumors show the highest gene expression of vimentin

and N-cadherin, and several known transcriptional repressors
of E-cadherin (i.e. TWIST1) compared to the Basal-like and
other tumor subtypes (Prat et al., 2010) (Figure 1B); in these
Claudin-low tumors, it appears as if the vimentin is expressed
within the stroma/fibroblasts and epithelial cells as revealed by
dual label immuno-fluorescence experiments (Figure 2AeC). In
addition, Claudin-low tumors show the lowest gene expression of epithelial differentiation markers such as CD24, EpCAM
and MUC1, while showing higher expression of CD44 and
CD49f (ITGA6) than luminal umors, which is concordant with
CD44þ/CD24/low and CD49fþ/EpCAM stem cell-like antigenic
phenotypes (Prat et al., 2010). Furthermore, various genomic
signatures derived from either CD44þ/CD24/low or normal
breast MaSCs-enriched FAC sorted populations, have been
found exclusively highly expressed within Claudin-low tumors
(Prat et al., 2010; Creighton et al., 2009; Shipitsin et al., 2007;
Dontu et al., 2003) (Stem Cell-like Signature, Figure 1B) and
true normal breast specimens.
Another extensively studied stem cell/TIC/CSC marker,
aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) (Resetkova et al., 2010;
Ginestier et al., 2007), is found highly expressed in both the
Normal Breast-like group and Claudin-low tumors. This is
not surprising since the expression of ALDH1 is not restricted
to epithelial cells but also noted in stromal cells (Lim et al.,
2009; Resetkova et al., 2010; Ginestier et al., 2007). Thus,
whether the high gene expression of ALDH1 observed in

Figure 2 e Selected histological features of the intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer. (AeC) Dual label immuno-fluorescence analysis of a Claudinlow sample with tumor cells positive for vimentin (green, A), keratin 5/19 (red, B) and both (yellow, white arrows, C). (D) Basal-like sample with
EGFR/HER1 positive staining. (E) Basal-like sample with keratin 5/6 positive staining. (F) Well-differentiated Luminal A tumor with strong
ER-positivity. (G) Poorly differentiated Luminal B tumor with weak/moderate ER-positivity. (H) HER2-enriched tumor with strong membrane
staining for HER2. (I) Claudin-low tumor with brisk lymphocytic infiltration (black arrows). This figure has been modified from Prat et al. (2010).

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

Claudin-low tumors has an origin in the stromal cells, the
tumor cells, or both, is currently unknown but is under investigation. Overall, the molecular characterization of Claudinlow tumors suggests that breast epithelial cancer cells within
this tumor subtype lack luminal and common epithelial cell
features and are enriched with stem cell-like/mesenchymal
characteristics that eventually attract stromal and/or immune-related cells into the microenvironment.

3.
Molecular identification of Claudin-low in vitro
model systems
Previous studies have shown that the genetic and transcriptional characteristics of breast tumors are present in cell lines
(Neve et al., 2006; Chin et al., 2006). In 2006, Neve et al. (2006)
analyzed the expression pattern of 51 breast cancer cell lines
and compared their profile with 145 primary breast tumors.
Hierarchical clustering of the transcriptional profiles of these
cell lines revealed two major clusters: luminal and basal. The
luminal cluster included the majority of ERþ and/or HER2þ
cell lines, while the basal cluster was further subdivided in
two subgroups: Basal-A (BT20, HCC1143, HCC1187, HCC1569,
HCC1937, HCC1954, HCC2157, HCC3153, HCC70, MDA-MB468,
SUM190PT, and SUM225) and Basal-B (BT549, HBL100,
HCC1500, HCC38, Hs578T, MDA-MB157, MDA-MB231, MDAMB435, MDA-MB436, SUM1315, SUM149PT, and SUM159PT).
Basal-A cell lines matched closely to the Basal-like signature
found in primary tumors. Basal-B cell lines exhibited a profile
that was less similar to in vivo Basal-like tumors, yet were still
referred to as “Basal”; other investigators have used different
names for these Basal-B cell lines such as Normal-like
(Hollestelle et al., 2009; Sieuwerts et al., 2009). Interestingly,
the Luminal, Basal-A and Basal-B molecular groups are also
maintained during 3D cell culture (Kenny et al., 2007).
More recently, we have shown that 9 previously called
“Basal-B/Normal-like” cell lines (BT549, HBL100, Hs578T,
MDA-MB157,
MDA-MB231,
MDA-MB435,
MDA-MB436,
SUM1315, SUM159PT) most resemble the Claudin-low subtype
(Prat et al., 2010). Among them, the triple-negative MDAMB231 is one of the most widely used breast cancer cell line
in cancer research due to its plasticity, invasive phenotype
and high metastatic potential (Minn et al., 2005; Kim et al.,
2009). Hierarchically clustering the gene expression data of
Neve et al. (2006) with an intrinsic gene list reveals that these
9-cell lines cluster together and display similar gene expression patterns as Claudin-low human tumors, namely low
expression of the luminal and HER2 gene clusters, inconsistent expression of the basal cluster, and low expression of
the cellecell adhesion cluster containing claudin 3, 4 and 7,
and E-cadherin (Figure 3A). Importantly, the top upregulated
and downregulated genes found in these 9 breast cancer cell
lines, when compared versus all other cell lines, were found
similarly expressed in Claudin-low tumors (Figure 3B). A major
difference, however, is that Claudin-low cell lines do not show
low expression of the proliferation cluster as do the in vivo
Claudin-low tumors; a potential explanation of this finding
is unknown but might be secondary to the in vitro culture conditions and/or selection process where slow growing cells are
selected against.

9

As with Claudin-low tumors, accumulating evidence suggest that these Claudin-low cell lines are enriched with stem
cell-like features. For example, Charafe-Jauffret et al. (2009)
reported that many of these cell lines show high expression
of ALDH1 and contain functional CSCs. This is in concordance
with two other reports (Fillmore and Kuperwasser, 2008;
Sheridan et al., 2006) that showed that the MDA-MB231,
SUM159PT, SUM1315 MDA-MB436, Hs578T and HBL100 cell
lines have a high proportion (>90%) of CD44þ/CD24/low cells,
and the CD44þ/CD24/low subpopulation obtained from these
cell lines were capable of forming tumors in NOD/SCID mice
and were more resistant to chemotherapy (Fillmore and
Kuperwasser, 2008). In addition, these potential Claudin-low
cell lines share gene expression profiles with the normal
breast bipotent subpopulation of Raouf et al. (2008) (CD49fþ/
MUC1CD133(CD10/THY1)þ) and the MaSC subpopulation
of Lim et al. (2009) (CD49fhigh/EpCAM). Moreover, we have
shown that the SUM159PT Claudin-low cell line possesses
a similar antigenic phenotype as the MaSC subpopulation of
Lim et al. (2009) with positivity for CD49f and low to absent
expression of EpCAM (Prat et al., 2010). Of note, EpCAM is currently being used as the antigen to isolate circulating tumor
cells by the CellSearch method (Cristofanilli et al., 2004).
Thus, if CSCs are EpCAM-negative, then it seems unlikely
that circulating CSC in breast cancer patients will be detected
by the CellSearch assay, which has already been shown
to be the case for the majority of Claudin-low cell lines
(Sieuwerts et al., 2009).
In general, breast cancer cell lines do not express the
immune response and mesenchymal/ECM gene clusters
observed in breast tumors (Figure 3A). This is likely due to
the lack of contamination of non-epithelial cell types in in vitro
epithelial cell cultures. However, Claudin-low cell lines are
still highly enriched with genes involved in wound/inflammatory responses compared to the other cell lines (Figure 4AeB),
concordant with the high expression of these same genes in
Claudin-low tumors. Both data point to the interaction between CSCs and the cellular microenvironment as a key event
in determining tumor growth and survival, which is supported
by many recent preclinical studies (Kim et al., 2009; CharafeJauffret et al., 2009; Santisteban et al., 2009). For example,
CD8 T-lymphoid cells can induce an EMT and a stem celllike phenotype in epithelial cells from a murine breast cancer
model (Santisteban et al., 2009), while highly metastatic cells
of the MDA-MB231 cell line enhance tumor growth, angiogenesis and stromal recruitment by secreting interleukin 6 (IL-6)
and interleukin 8 (IL-8) (Kim et al., 2009). Blockade of the IL-8
receptor CXCR1 using a CXCR1-specific blocking antibody or
repertaxin (a small-molecule CXCR1 inhibitor), selectively depletes the CSC population of the Claudin-low cell line SUM159
(Ginestier et al., 2010). Thus, strategies to interfere with these
inflammatory-related processes might be useful in the treatment of breast cancers in general, and for Claudin-low tumors
specifically.
Given the low expression of Claudin proteins and E-cadherin in Claudin-low tumors, it might be possible to identify
these tumors using a methodology like immunohistochemistry; however, we believe that classifications based upon the
lack of marker(s) is a troublesome method for multiple reasons
including 1) assay technical failure would yield false-negative

10

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

Figure 3 e Identification of the Claudin-low profile in breast cancer cell lines. (A) Intrinsic Gene clusters selected in Figure 1 are shown here using
the cell line gene expression data set of Neve et al. (2006). The sample associated dendrogram has been derived by semi-unsupervised hierarchical
clustering using the intrinsic list from Parker et al. (2009b) and the 51 cell lines of Neve et al. Claudin-low cell lines are shown in yellow. Each
colored square represents the relative transcript abundance (in log2 space) with highest expression being red, average expression being black, and
lowest expression being green. (B) Mean expression of the top highly expressed (n [ 833) and lowly expressed (n [ 642) genes in Claudin-low cell
lines across 337 human breast tumor samples classified according to intrinsic subtype, including the Normal Breast-like group. Both gene lists were
obtained by performing Significance Analysis Microarray (SAM) between Claudin-low breast cancer cell lines vs. the rest (FDR<5%). BL, Basallike; CL, Claudin-low; H2, HER2-enriched; LA, Luminal A; LB, Luminal B; NBL, Normal Breast-like. This figure has been modified from
Prat et al. (2010).

results, 2) tumors derived from other tissues, or cell types,
could yield false positives. For example, a poorly differentiated
sarcoma of the breast might be called a Claudin-low breast tumor due to its location and lack of staining for Claudin 3. This
point is particularly relevant given the wide-spread classification of breast tumors as “triple-negative” breast cancers.
Therefore, to address this issue and using the cell line gene

expression data of Neve et al. (2006), we developed a w800
gene Claudin-low centroid-based predictor (which contains
genes whose high and low expression defines Claudin-low tumors) and applied it to our in vivo human breast tumor data set
as a test/validation set. Using this cell line-based predictor, we
were able to identify the Claudin-low human tumors samples
with high sensitivity (87.5%) and specificity (97.0%) (Prat et al.,

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

11

A

B

Figure 4 e Expression of inflammatory response/angiogenesis biological processes genes across 52 breast cancer cell lines. (A) Selected expression
of genes involved in wound response, angiogenesis and/or inflammatory response. The sample/cell line associated dendrogram was derived by
semi-unsupervised hierarchical clustering using the intrinsic list from Parker et al. (2009b). Claudin-low cell lines are shown in yellow color. (B)
Selected highly expressed Gene Ontology (GO) terms in Claudin-low cell lines. The highly expressed gene list was obtained by SAM between
Claudin-low breast cancer cell lines vs. rest (FDR<5%). Biologic analysis of microarray data was performed with DAVID annotation tool (http://
david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) (Dennis et al., 2003).

2010). We believe the 9-Cell Line Claudin-low predictor is currently the best method to identify these tumors and cell lines
across microarray data sets; however, this predictor is sensitive to differences in data set diversity and across data set normalization methods because it is based upon relative gene
expression levels. In addition, tumors with high tumor associated stromal content might also be identified as Claudin-low
due to their similar gene expression patterns.

4.
Clinical characteristics of the Claudin-low and the
other intrinsic tumor subtypes
4.1.

Clinical-pathological parameters and prognosis

The main clinical-pathological features of the molecular
portraits of breast cancer, including the Claudin-low subtype,
are shown in Figure 5A, which is based upon three independent microarray-based data sets (total n ¼ 748). Overall, Claudin-low tumors are the least frequent subtype (prevalence
w12e14%) and are mostly high-grade and ER/PR/HER2
(i.e. triple-negative) tumors similar to the Basal-like subtype,
which is concordant with the low expression of the luminal
and HER2 intrinsic gene clusters observed in both tumor
types. However, it is important to note that w15e25% of Claudin-low tumors are hormonal receptor-positive (HRþ) and
w10% of Basal-like tumors are also HRþ.
In terms of patient outcomes, Claudin-low tumors are poor
outcome tumors compared to luminal A tumors (Figure 5B).
However, no differences in survival were observed between
Claudin-low tumors and other poor prognosis subtypes
(Luminal B, HER2-enriched and Basal-like), or even between
Claudin-low tumors versus all other tumors combined. This

is in concordance with previous stem cell-like signatures
that do not show prognostic ability as a whole, although subsets of genes within these signatures can predict outcome
(Creighton et al., 2009; Shipitsin et al., 2007). At first glance,
the invasiveness gene signature (IGS) reported by Liu et al.
(2007) may seem an exception. However, the IGS was derived
by comparing the geneeexpression profile of CD44þCD24/low
tumorigenic breast cancer cells with normal breast epithelial
cells (i.e. HMEC) and not versus differentiated (CD44 and/or
CD24þ) tumor cells as other studies have done (Creighton
et al., 2009; Shipitsin et al., 2007). Therefore, the IGS likely distinguishes Luminal A tumors from the other poor prognostic
subtypes, and it is possibly not focused on stem cell features
but rather general poor prognosis tumor features.
Our data also show that the classical pathological markers
used in the clinic for tumor classification (ER, PR and HER2) do
not fully recapitulate the intrinsic subtypes (Figure 6). As previously shown by Parker et al., 2009b, this finding demonstrates that ER, PR and HER2 status alone, or in combination,
are not accurate surrogates for true intrinsic subtype status.
For example, in a combined data set of w400 tumors/patients
(UNC337 (Prat et al., 2010) and MDACC133 (Hess et al., 2006))
(Figure 6A), 49% of triple-negative tumors were Basal-like,
30% Claudin-low, 9% HER2-enriched, 6% Luminal B, 5% Luminal A and 1% Normal Breast-like; if the Claudin-low classification is ignored, then 72% of triple-negative tumors are
Basal-like. Conversely, 6e29% (Sorlie et al., 2001; Nielsen
et al., 2004) and 9e13% (Sorlie et al., 2001) of Basal-like tumors
are ERþ or HER2þ, respectively (Figure 6B). Thus the triplenegative surrogate for Basal-like makes both kinds of mistakes in that it includes samples that are not Basal-like and
it fails to identify a significant number of Basal-like tumors
(Figure 6A). Preliminary data suggest that Basal-like tumors
that are not triple-negative behave as Basal-like tumors that

12

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

A

B

Figure 5 e Clinical-pathological characteristics of the current intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer. (A) Table summarizing the percentages of the
different pathological variables across three microarray data sets with clinical information (UNC337, NKI295 (van ’t Veer et al., 2002) and
MDACC133). (B) KaplaneMeier relapse-free survival and overall survival curves using the UNC337 data set with Normal Breast-like samples
excluded. This figure has been modified from Prat et al. (2010).

are, which may be clinically important if therapies are found
that target the unique biology of Basal-like cancers.
Previous studies (including our own) have tried to define
Basal-like carcinomas based on immunohistochemical (IHC)
surrogate profiles. For example, EGFR and keratins 5/6 (CK5/6)
(Figure 2DeE) have been proposed as positive IHC markers
on top of the ER-PR-HER2- definition (the “five-marker
method”, also known as the Core Basal group). This definition
has previously been shown to identify Basal-like tumors versus microarray-based classifications with 76% sensitivity
and 100% specificity (Nielsen et al., 2004). Furthermore, in
a series of 4046 breast tumors (Cheang et al., 2008), 17% (639
of 3744) were defined as the triple-negative, whereas 9.0%
were Basal-like by the five-marker Core Basal definition. Interestingly, when the triple-negative group was segregated into
Core Basal and the ‘5 Negative Profile’ (5NP), the Core Basal
group showed a significantly worse outcome compared to
the 5NP group. Thus, although two distinct groups within triple-negative tumors seem to be identified, further paired

microarray-IHC studies should determine whether the 5NP
group resembles or enriches for the Claudin-low subtype.
However, as shown in Figure 6B, up to w30% of Claudin-low
tumors do not fall into the ER/HER2- clinical category.
Many efforts are being devoted to try to identify those patients with good outcome, and as shown in Figure 5B, patients
with a low-risk of relapse are found almost exclusively in the
Luminal A subtype (Parker et al., 2009b; Fan et al., 2006). Thus,
there is a need to find biomarkers that can distinguish Luminal A from Luminal B tumors, both of which are mainly HRþ
(Figure 2FeG). A major biological difference between luminal
A and B is the proliferation signature, which has higher
expression in luminal B tumors than in luminal A tumors
(Cheang et al., 2009; Nielsen et al., 2010); histological grade
also mirrors this proliferation difference (Figure 2FeG). Indeed, proliferation is a main “driver” of the majority of genomic predictors designed to separate ER-positive lymph nodenegative tumors into prognostic subgroups (Sotiriou et al.,
2006). For example, the expression of proliferation related

13

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

A

Triple Negatives
with Claudin-low

Triple Negatives
without Claudin-low

1%
6%
5%
9%
49%
30%

B

Claudin-low

Basal-like
Claudin-low
HER2-enriched
Luminal A
Luminal B
Normal-like

6%
5%

8%

9%

72%

Basal-like

2%

2%
7%
13%

8%

13%
71%

83%

HER2-enriched

Luminal B
1%

18%

ER+/HER2+
ER+/HER2ER-/HER2+
ER-/HER2-

Luminal A
2%

7%

15%

5% 7%

20%

16%
51%

72%

87%

Figure 6 e Distribution of clinical-pathological categories relative to the intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer. (A) Intrinsic subtype distribution
within the triple-negative tumor category shown with and without Claudin-low tumors. (B) Distribution of ERD/HER2D, ERL/HER2D,
ERL/HER2L clinical groups in the Claudin-low, Basal-like, HER2-enriched, Luminal B, and Luminal A within each subtype.

genes, such as MKI67 (encoding Ki-67) and Cyclin B1, are the
most heavily weighted component in calculating the recurrence score derived from the OncoTypeDX assay (Paik et al.,
2004). Thus, these and other similar prognostic predictors
classify virtually all Luminal B tumors, as well as all the
Basal-like and HER2-enriched tumors, as high risk of recurrence (Fan et al., 2006). It is important to note here that recent
studies have questioned the reproducibility, and thus the relevance of the Luminal B distinction, which is likely due to the
large amount of heterogeneity seen within luminal cancers.
For example in Parker et al. (2009b), at least 5 subgroups of Luminal cancers were seen (see Figure A1). Since there appears
to be only one good outcome luminal subtype, but multiple
types of poor outcome luminal tumors, proliferation scores
and other means of identifying samples that have deviated
away from the prototypical Luminal A profile are what the
current ERþ prognosticators are doing (like OncotypeDX and
Mammaprint). It is also because of this heterogeneity within

Luminal tumors that the Risk or Relapse (ROR) score was developed in Parker et al. (2009b), which should be less sensitive
to changing distributions of poor outcome subtypes of disease
when compared versus a nearest centroid predictor.
The protein expression of Ki-67 has been studied as a potential IHC marker that could distinguish Luminal B from Luminal
A subtypes in HRþ breast tumors. In Cheang et al. (2009), 357
breast tumors were profiled and tumor subtypes were assigned
using the 50-gene qRT-PCR ‘PAM50’ subtype predictor that we
have recently validated (Parker et al., 2009b). By linking the
available immunohistochemical data with the expression profile assignments, the authors identified 84 and 60 HRþ/HER2
tumors as Luminal A and B, respectively. Thus, the Luminal A
subtype was defined as being HRþ/HER2 and low for Ki-67,
and the Luminal B subtype as being HRþ/HER2 and high for
Ki-67 or HRþ/HER2þ. Further validation of this surrogate IHC
panel in an independent population-based cohort of 4046
tumors demonstrated the prognostic value of this Luminal

1
B IHC definition within homogeneously treated patient subsets.
However, we must keep in mind that although the HRþ/HER2/
Ki67-high/low IHC panel will distinguish the majority of Luminal B from A tumors, this definition does not identify all the
tumors within the Luminal B expression-defined subtype since
up to 20% and 7% of Luminal B tumors are clinically ERþ/HER2þ
and ER/HER2, respectively (Figure 6B).
Finally, the HER2-enriched subtype consists of samples
that are mostly clinically HER2þ (Figure 2H), highly proliferative, lack expression of the basal cluster, and show low expression of the luminal cluster compared to Luminal A and
B tumors. As seen with the others subtypes, IHC markers
(i.e. ER/HER2þ) are not an accurate surrogate for this particular intrinsic subtype, since only w50% of HER2-enriched
tumors are ER/HER2þ. As shown in Figure 6B, 49% of HER2enriched tumors are divided into the following clinical
categories: ERþ/HER2þ (15%), ERþ/HER2 (16%) and ER/
HER2 (18%). It is important to note that although w30% of
HER2-enriched tumors are clinically HER2- (hence the subtype
name of HER2-enriched ), these tumors might be driven by
a similar functional event such as the HER2 mutation or
mutation of some downstream pathway component that phenocopies HER2 amplification.

4.2.
Metaplastic and medullary breast carcinomas,
BRCA1 dysfunction, and the Claudin-low/stem cell-like
profile
The majority of Claudin-low tumors are invasive ductal carcinomas not otherwise specified (IDC NOS), which is the most
frequent histological diagnosis in breast cancer (WHO
Classification of Tumors, 2003). However, metaplastic and
medullary carcinomas have also been linked with the Claudin-low profile (Prat et al., 2010; Hennessy et al., 2009). These
two special histological types represent less than 5e7% of all
breast cancer diagnoses (WHO Classification of Tumours,
2003), and generally are poorly differentiated triple-negative
tumors. However, while metaplastic carcinomas are associated with poor prognosis and treatment resistance
(Hennessy et al., 2005; Al Sayed et al., 2006), medullary carcinomas tend to show good outcomes despite their aggressive
pathological features (Vu-Nishino et al., 2005).
In Hennessy et al. (2009) the expression profiles of 12 metaplastic carcinomas (MBC) were compared with 184 breast
tumors (mainly IDC NOS) and 9 normal breast samples. MBC
were somewhat heterogeneous in this analysis with 2 MBC
clustering with the Claudin-low tumors, 2 with the Basal-like
tumors, and 6 formed a potential novel subgroup of tumors
intermediate between Basal-like and Claudin-low tumors.
However, the majority of these metaplastic tumors (n ¼ 7/12)
were further identified as Claudin-low by the 9-Cell Line Claudin-low predictor (Prat et al., 2010). In addition, metaplastic
tumors as a group were found to be enriched with a CD44þ/
CD24low/ stem cell-like gene signature similar to Claudin-low
tumors (Hennessy et al., 2009), suggesting that metaplastic carcinomas and Claudin-low tumors possess similar transcriptional features that are enriched in purified breast TIC fractions.
In Prat et al. (2010), 5 of 21 (24%) Claudin-low tumors
showed medullary-like features such as pushing margins
and brisk tumor lymphocytic infiltration (Figure 2I). As

defined by Ridolfi et al. (1977), medullary carcinomas are divided into 2 categories: typical and atypical medullary carcinomas. Typical medullary carcinomas display at least 75%
syncytial architecture, marked anisonucleosis, a well-defined margin, diffuse lymphoplasmocytic infiltrate, and absence of tubular differentiation and/or an intraductal
component. Atypical medullary carcinomas also have the
syncytial architecture and at least two or three of the above
criteria. By strict definition, the Claudin-low tumors with
medullary-like features identified in Prat et al. (2010) did
not meet Ridolfi’s criteria to be called either typical or atypical medullary. However, further microarray analyses demonstrated that medullary carcinomas as a group share similar
MaSC gene expression profiles as do Claudin-low tumors,
which is concordant with another report (Honeth et al.,
2008) that showed that 8/8 medullary carcinomas were positive for the CD44þ/CD24 phenotype by IHC staining. The link
between medullary carcinomas (as well as metaplastic carcinomas) with the Claudin-low gene expression profile was
further observed in a comprehensive data set of 113 tumors
from 11 special histological types of breast cancer, including
10 medullary and 20 metaplastic carcinomas (Weigelt et al.,
2008). In this data set, 20% and 40% of medullary and metaplastic tumors previously called Basal-like were now identified as Claudin-low by the 9-Cell Line Claudin-low predictor
(Prat et al., 2010). Interestingly, the Claudin-low breast cancer
cell lines MDA-MB157 and Hs578T were derived from medullary (Young et al., 1974) and metaplastic (Hackett et al., 1977)
carcinomas, respectively.
The fact that a subset of medullary and metaplastic carcinomas share Claudin-low gene expression profiles indicates
that these tumors might share a common cell of origin, and/
or similar initiating genetic event(s). One of these oncogenic
alterations may involve the BRCA1 pathway. Both metaplastic
and medullary carcinomas have been shown to have a w60%
incidence of methylation of BRCA1 (Turner et al., 2006; Esteller
et al., 2000). 13% of breast tumors from BRCA1 mutation carriers have pure medullary histology (Eisinger et al., 1998),
while 60% show medullary-like features (Lakhani et al.,
1998), especially pushing margins and lymphoid infiltration.
Metaplastic tumors also have been recently documented in
this particular patient subpopulation (Suspitsin et al., 2009).
It is interesting to note that 2/4 BRCA1-mutated breast cancer
cell lines are Claudin-low (MDA-MB436 and SUM1315), while
the other 2 are Basal-like (SUM149PT and HCC1937) (Elstrodt
et al., 2006).
To further explore the association between BRCA1-mutated breast cancer and the Claudin-low subtype, we applied
the Claudin-low predictor to the NKI (n ¼ 337) microarray
data set (van ’t Veer et al., 2002; van de Vijver et al., 2002),
which includes 18 BRCA1-mutated breast tumors. Of the 18
BRCA1 mutant tumors, we identified 12 as Basal-like (67%), 4
as Claudin-low (22%), 1 as HER2-enriched (5.5%), and 1 as Normal Breast-like (Prat and Perou, unpublished observation).
This finding is concordant with a 20% incidence of Claudinlow/mesenchymal tumors observed in the Brca1Co/Co;
TgMMTV-Cre; p53þ/ breast cancer mouse model
(Herschkowitz et al., 2007). Thus, although BRCA1 mutations
are most frequent in Basal-like tumors, they may also occur
within the Claudin-low subtype and further studies should


determine differences in prognosis and treatment response
between BRCA1-mutated Claudin-low and Basal-like tumors.

4.3.
Intrinsic subtyping in the adjuvant and
neoadjuvant setting
Current knowledge of the biology of breast cancer has provided the basis of the various successful adjuvant and neoadjuvant treatment strategies: endocrine therapy for HRþ
disease (with or without chemotherapy), anti-HER2 therapies
such as trastuzumab in combination or sequentially after chemotherapy for HER2þ disease, and chemotherapy for patients
with triple-negative disease (Podo et al.). However, the biological diversity displayed by the breast cancer intrinsic subtypes
indicate that further sub-classification of patients into different treatment groups should be considered.
Two studies have directly evaluated the response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy of the intrinsic subtypes as determined
by gene expression (Rouzier et al., 2005a; Parker et al., 2009a).
Rouzier et al. (2005a) evaluated 82 primary breast tumors
treated with 12 weeks of paclitaxel (T) followed by 4 cycles
of 5-flourouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FAC).
Surgery was performed after 24 weeks of neoadjuvant therapy
and patients were evaluated for pathological complete response (pCR). Among 22 patients with Basal-like tumors and
the 20 patients with HER2-enriched tumors, the pCR rates
were both 45%, whereas only 7% of Luminal A/B tumors
achieved a pCR. More recently, Parker et al. (2009b) evaluated
the ability of the molecular subtypes to predict pCR to anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapy using a combined cohort
of 357 patients from three different neoadjuvant studies
(Parker et al., 2009a). Among the subtypes, Basal-like and
HER2-enriched tumors showed the highest response rate
with 43% and 36% pCR rates, respectively, whereas Luminal
A and B tumors showed 7% and 17% pCR rates. Multivariable
logistic regression indicated that intrinsic subtype was an
independent predictor of pCR and ER status was no longer significant when subtype was included in the model. These studies highlight the higher chemo-sensitivity of Basal-like and
HER2-enriched subtypes (largely ER-negative) and the
chemo-insensitivity of the Luminal subtypes (largely ER-positive), which explains why ER status is such a strong predictor
of pCR among the various clinical variables (Carey et al., 2007;
Rouzier et al., 2005b). The relative insensitivity of Luminal/
ERþ tumors may be due to an intact ER-cMYB-HEP27-MDM2TP53 response cascade, which may allow these tumors to go
into a TP53 and p21 mediated cell cycle arrest in response to
chemotherapy treatment (Deisenroth et al., 2010). These studies illustrate the need to account for varying subtype proportions when comparing pCR statistics across clinical trials.
The relationship between subtype and chemotherapy response has also been evaluated using IHC surrogates for the
molecular subtypes. In Carey et al. (2007), 107 patients were
treated with neoadjuvant AC for 4 cycles and followed for
a median of 39 months. As expected, pCR to chemotherapy
was significantly better among triple-negative (27%) and
HER2þ/ER (36%) tumors versus ERþ tumors (7%). However,
despite the lower rates of response to therapy, disease-free
survival was still better for patients with ERþ tumors due to

15

higher rates of relapse in triple-negative and HER2þ/ER patients with residual disease. Known as the “triple-negative
paradox”, this hypothesis was further tested retrospectively
by Liedtke et al. (2008) by comparing response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and survival using 1118 patients with triplenegative and non-triple-negative breast cancer. In this study,
patients with triple-negative disease had significantly higher
pCR rates when compared with non-triple-negative disease
(22% vs. 11%), but showed decreased 3-year progression-free
survival and overall survival rates. More importantly, both triple-negative and non-triple-negative patients had similar survival if pCR was achieved, thus some triple-negative patients
can have good long term survival outcomes. In contrast,
patients with residual disease had worse overall survival if
they had triple-negative disease compared with non-triplenegative disease. Thus, the pCR surrogate marker after chemotherapy seems appropriate for Basal-like and Claudin-low
subtypes, which represent w80% of all triple-negative tumors.
The endocrine treatment sensitivity of Luminal A versus
Luminal B subtypes has not been specifically studied until recently (Cheang et al., 2009; Nielsen et al., 2010). In Cheang et al.
(2009), among 976 tumors from patients treated with tamoxifen as their only adjuvant systemic therapy, the authors identified 584 as luminal A, 303 as luminal B, and 89 as luminal/
HER2þ (defined as ERþ or PRþ and HER2þ) by using a surrogate
immunohistochemical panel whose performance was previously trained using the PAM50 predictor (see above). The 10year relapse-free survival was 70% survival for patients with
luminal A (HRþ/HER2/Ki67low) tumors, and dropped to
53% for patients with luminal B (HRþ/HER2/Ki67high) tumors, and 51% for patients with luminal/HER2þ tumors. A
more recent analysis using the more precise qRT-PCR PAM50
assay and tumors from the same University of British Columbia cohort of ER-positive tumors treated with tamoxifen-only
confirmed these survival results, and was able to identify a set
of very good outcome patients whose 20 year survival probability was w95% (Nielsen et al., 2010); thus, high proliferative
Luminal B tumors have a worse prognosis despite treatment
with tamoxifen, while Luminal A/Risk of Relapse (ROR)-low
tumors show favorable relapse-free and disease specific survival outcomes after treatment with tamoxifen alone in
node-negative patients. Furthermore, treatment with aromatase inhibitors might not change the overall hormone-resistance of Luminal B tumors. In the TransATAC study, high
recurrence scores in the primary tumor as determined by
the OncotypeDX assay were independently associated with
higher risk of relapse in 1308 HRþ node-negative and nodepositive patients treated with anastrozole (or tamoxifen)
(Dowsett et al., 2008). As previously discussed, HRþ tumors
with a high recurrence score are mostly Luminal B cancers
(Fan et al., 2006). In addition, features of the Luminal B subtype
such as high Ki-67 and low ER status in postsurgical samples,
were independently associated with relapse-free survival after treatment with neoadjuvant letrozole or tamoxifen (P024
trial) (Ellis et al., 2008). Luminal B tumors are not only relatively chemo-insensitive tumors, but they are also poor prognostic and relatively hormone-resistant tumors. Clinical trials
focusing in this particular luminal subtype are needed and
several are in the planning stage.

16

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

The known mechanisms of resistance to hormonal therapy
may help decipher the biology of Luminal B tumors (Loi et al.,
2008). Among them, ligand-independent activation of ER by
the epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) family has been
extensively studied (Osborne and Schiff, 2005). In particular,
HER2 overexpression and/or amplification (HER2þ) confers increased resistance to endocrine treatment in preclinical
models (Benz et al., 1992; Pietras et al., 1995) and in ER-positive
breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen (Houston et al.,
1999; Lipton et al., 2003) or AIs (Lipton et al., 2003; Ellis et al.,
2006). The HER family of receptors includes EGFR (also known
as HER1), HER2, HER3, and HER4. HER2 is a ligand-less receptor
that forms homodimers and heterodimers with the other
members of the HER family, resulting in activation of signal
transduction pathways that increase proliferation such as
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 30 -kinase (PI3K)/mTOR. A variety of kinases from
both pathways can phosphorylate specific sites of the ER,
leading to ligand-independent ER activation. Conversely, ER
itself can activate the growth factor receptor pathway either
through genomic and/or nongenomic signaling (Osborne and
Schiff, 2005). Thus, in HRþ/HER2þ breast tumors, which represent 20% of Luminal B tumors, a vicious cycle might be established between ER mechanisms of action and HER2 leading to
enhanced cell proliferation and cell survival. Two clinical trials have tested this hypothesis and have demonstrated that
a combined endocrine and anti-HER2 approach significantly
enhances progression-free survival and clinical benefit rates
in patients with HRþ/HER2þ metastatic breast cancer
(Johnston et al., 2009; Kaufman et al., 2006).
In HRþ/HER2-/high proliferative tumors, which represent
w72% of tumors in the Luminal B subtype, the HER-pathway
might also be active in a different manner than HER2 amplification. For example, overexpression of HER2 in luminal breast
cancer cell lines is not required for HER-signaling if HER ligands are available (Agus et al., 2002; Menendez et al., 2006).
In addition, gene expression profiling of luminal MCF-7 cells
treated with HER3 ligand heregulin (HRG) identified a similar
expression profile as the Luminal B subtype in patients (Loi
et al., 2009). Thus, activation of the HER-pathway and/or similar downstream functional pathways such as the PI3K/mTOR
pathway could explain the shared biology between ERþ/
HER2-/high proliferative tumors and ERþ/HER2þ tumors,
both of which are contained within the Luminal B subtype.
A successful targeted treatment strategy has been the development of anti-HER2 therapies such as trastuzumab, an
anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody. In patients with HER2þ tumors, administration of trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting
in combination with chemotherapy results in an improvement in recurrence-free survival as well as overall survival
(Piccart-Gebhart et al., 2005; Romond et al., 2005). Despite
this success, many HER2þ patients do not benefit from trastuzumab, which has led to many efforts to identify additional
biomarkers of response/benefit to anti-HER2 therapies. Once
again, the molecular subtypes might help better understand
the biology of this responsiveness. Looking at HER2-positivity
across subtypes reveals that although the majority of HER2þ
tumors have a HER2-enriched gene expression profile, all the
other intrinsic subtypes have HER2þ tumors within them, indicating that the HER2þ clinical category is biologically

heterogeneous. Thus, further clinical trials should try to answer these two challenging questions: (1) does the HER2enriched subtype “enrich” for HER2þ patients that have
a higher response/benefit to anti-HER2 therapies than
HER2þ and non-HER2-enriched tumors? (2) do patients with
clinically HER2- tumors within the HER2-enriched subtype
benefit from anti-HER2 therapies? This question will be interesting to address given recent suggestions that some HER2patients may gain a trastuzumab benefit (Paik et al., 2008),
however, this can only be addressed through the analysis of
trials where all patients were given trastuzumab, which are
few.
Another challenge will be to identify effective targets for the
triple-negative subpopulation, which is basically composed of
Basal-like and Claudin-low tumors. The list of molecular targets
that are being evaluated here is constantly growing and includes: poly(adenosine diphosphate [ADP]eribose) polymerase
1 (PARP1), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF, see
Figure 1C), HER1, MAPK, PI3K/mTOR, and the stem cell pathways NOTCH and Hedgehog. One of the promising therapies being tested on this subgroup of tumors are inhibitors of PARP1,
a key player in the repair of DNA single-stand breaks. As noted
earlier, Basal-like and potentially Claudin-low tumors, are commonly seen in BRCA1 mutation carriers (Foulkes et al., 2003),
and defects in the BRCA1 pathway may also be involved in sporadic tumors of both subtypes. Dysfunctional BRCA1 results in
deficient DNA-repair by homologous recombination, which
causes genetic aberrations that drive carcinogenesis. The inhibition of PARP1 in this BRCA1 dysfunctional context leads to the
accumulation of collapsed replication forks, DNA doublestrand breaks, and cell death (Rottenberg et al., 2008). Defect
or inhibition of these genes individually is tolerable, yet in combination is lethal, a concept called synthetic lethality. A phase 1
clinical trial evaluated olaparib (AZD2281) as a single agent in
a study patient population composed of hereditary BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutated cancers observed an anti-tumor activity of
w60%. A subsequent randomized phase 2 clinical trial evaluated another PARP1 inhibitor, BSI-201, in combination with
gemcitabine/carboplatin in 123 subjects with sporadic triplenegative metastatic breast cancer (O’Shaughnessy et al.,
2009). Preliminary analysis demonstrated that the addition
of BSI-201 to standard chemotherapy doubled the progression-free survival compared to chemotherapy alone. Intriguingly, PARP1 and other DNA-repair pathway-related genes
such as CHEK1 are typically found highly expressed in
Basal-like cancers, suggesting they may be under a constant
state of DNA-repair, which may not be seen in Claudin-low
tumors (Figure 1B). Further studies should determine if inhibition of PARP1 is a Basal-like specific therapy, or alternatively, a therapy that may increase the chemo-sensitivity
in any breast cancer that is homologous recombination
DNA-repair deficient, regardless of subtype.

5.
The CSC hypothesis, treatment resistance, and
the intrinsic subtypes
According to the cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis, a cancer
arises either from transformation of a normal stem/progenitor cell with the inherent capacity to self-renew and to

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

differentiate into the various cell types that form the bulk of
the tumor, or alternatively, arises from a differentiated cancer
cell that acquires the ability to self-renew (Rosen and Jordan,
2009; Jordan, 2009). Either way, the CSC hypothesis suggests
that cells with CSC features exist and represent a minor subpopulation within a tumor, but that they are the driver of
the entire tumor phenotype.
The CSC hypothesis has important implications for breast
cancer treatment strategies since breast CSCs are more resistant to both radiation and chemotherapy (Creighton et al.,
2009; Gupta et al., 2009; Li et al., 2008; Diehn et al., 2009;
McDermott and Wicha, 2010). In Li et al. (2008), paired breast
cancer biopsies were obtained from 52 breast cancer patients
before and after 12 weeks of treatment with either neoadjuvant chemotherapy or after 6 weeks of treatment with the
EGFR/HER2 inhibitor lapatinib in HER2þ patients. The authors
observed that chemotherapy treatment increased the percentage of CD44þ/CD24/low cells and the mammosphere formation efficiency (MSFE) regardless of the ER/PR/HER2 status
of the tumor, while in the lapatinib group this increase was
not observed suggesting that anti-HER2 therapies in HER2þ
disease specifically target cancer stem cells. More recently,
Creighton et al. (2009) derived a gene signature from CD44þ/
CD24/low and cancer mammospheres (MMS) cells (both isolated from primary human breast cancers) by comparing
these cells with the CD44/CD24þ cell fraction. To examine
the signature’s clinical and therapeutic significance, the authors evaluated gene expression profiles of breast tumors before and after chemo- and hormone therapy. The CD44þ/
CD24/low/MMS signature was more pronounced in tumor
tissue remaining after either endocrine therapy (letrozole) or
chemotherapy (docetaxel), consistent with the selective survival of CSCs after treatment. In addition, the authors observed an increased expression of mesenchymal markers
such as vimentin in cytokeratin-positive epithelial cells in
the post-letrozole treated samples (Gupta et al., 2009).
The CD44þ/CD24/low/MMS gene expression profile of
Creighton et al. (2009) has also been compared to the intrinsic
subtypes of breast cancer, including the Claudin-low subtype.
Of note, only the Claudin-low group showed a clear enrichment for the CD44þ/CD24/low/MMS signature, further suggesting that these tumors might be enriched with CSCs/TICs.
To further explore the potential association between Claudin-low tumors and treatment resistance, we evaluated the
potential chemo-sensitivity of Claudin-low tumors to neoadjuvant anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapy using
a cancer patient data set of 133 pre-treated samples (Prat
et al., 2010). In this data set, Claudin-low tumors showed
a trend towards a lower pathological complete response
(pCR) rate after anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapy
compared to Basal-like tumors (39% vs. 73% pCR rates,
Figure 5A), but their pCR rate was significantly higher than
Luminal A (0%) or B (19%) tumors. These findings provided
the first evidence that Claudin-low tumors show some chemotherapy insensitivity; however, their pCR rate was still significantly high, suggesting that they are not entirely therapy
resistant. Further studies are needed to better characterize
the treatment sensitivity of this tumor subtype, with Claudin-low cell lines and transgenic mouse models offering
a good opportunity to tackle this issue preclinically.

6.

17

Developmental origins of the intrinsic subtypes

The first evidence that the breast cancer intrinsic subtypes
might resemble different developmental cells types of the normal breast came from a recent report by Lim et al. (2009) where
they functionally characterized and expression profiled different subpopulations of normal mammary epithelial cells using
FAC sorting with two cell surface markers: EpCAM and CD49f.
More precisely, the authors isolated highly purified subpopulations of normal human MaSC/bipotent cells (CD49fhi/
EpCAM), committed luminal progenitor cells (CD49fþ/
EpCAMþ), and mature ERþ/luminal cells (CD49f/EpCAMþ).
Importantly, the authors observed that the luminal progenitor
signature was very similar to the Basal-like breast tumor signature. The authors also demonstrated that BRCA1-mutated
pre-neoplastic breast tissues, which are known to have a lifetime risk of developing Basal-like breast cancer of >80%,
showed an aberrant expansion of this luminal progenitor subpopulation. These results, together with recent data coming
from a genetically engineered mouse models study that deleted BRCA1 in the mouse mammary epithelial luminal progenitors (Molyneux et al., 2010), suggest that the potential
cell of origin of sporadic and BRCA1-mutated Basal-like breast
cancers could be the luminal progenitor (which shows the
Basal-like tumor expression profile); however, other plausible
hypotheses exist and are discussed below.
Similar to these Lim et al. (2009) observations, we hypothesized that a luminal epithelial differentiation program from
a MaSC/Luminal progenitor/Mature luminal might exist
(Figure 7A). To genomically evaluate this hypothesis, we
used Lim et al.’s FACS data to derive a continuous “differentiation predictor model” for the luminal pathway (Prat et al.,
2010). Using this differentiation score predictor and genomic
data of human breast tumors, we observed that the majority
of invasive breast tumors can be placed along the normal
mammary luminal epithelial differentiation hierarchy starting with the Claudin-low subtype being closest to the MaSC,
followed by the Basal-like, then the HER2-enriched, and then
both Luminal tumors subtypes being closest to the mature luminal cell (Prat et al., 2010). As shown in Figure 7A, this simplified mammary luminal epithelial differentiation axis goes
from a mesenchymal state, through a basal-like state (that
has characteristics of mesenchyme, basal and luminal cells)
to a mature luminal state. We note that this differentiation hierarchy does not take into account the myoepithelial cell lineage development, which based upon the data of Lim et al.
(2009) suggests that the myoepithelial linage breaks off from
the luminal lineage before the Basal-like/luminal progenitor
state (Figure 7A). Much less is known about myoepithelial
cell development and where and when bi-potency is lost
(Visvader, 2009), however, learning more about this lineage
will likely provide important information about some of the
rare breast cancer histological subtypes that show myoepithelial/basal-like differentiation including medullary and adenocystic carcinomas.
These luminal developmental lineage data could support
the hypothesis that each ‘intrinsic’ subtype reflects a unique
mammary epithelial cell state along the differentiation hierarchy, and that each transformed cell (i.e. cell of origin) could

18

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

Figure 7 e Possible developmental origins of the intrinsic breast
cancer subtypes. (A) Normal mammary luminal and myoepithelial
differentiation hierarchies with approximate genomic expression
patterns of mesenchymal, basal, and luminal profiles highlighted. (B)
Hypothesis 1: each molecular subtype originates in a normal
epithelial cell along the luminal differentiation hierarchy. Aberrant
symmetric division expands each subpopulation of cells to form the
bulk of the tumor, which is composed entirely of TICs. (C)
Hypothesis 2: the MaSC subpopulation is the cell of origin of all
breast cancers and depending upon its genetic alterations, a given
tumor arrests at a distinct stage of development. (D) Hypothesis 3:
each molecular subtype originates in a normal epithelial cell along the
luminal differentiation hierarchy. However, the transformation events

derive from a transformed cell at each stage, which would
then form the bulk of the tumor by symmetric divisions
(Hypothesis #1, Figure 7B). In this scenario, MaSCs would
give rise to Claudin-low tumors, Luminal progenitor cells to
Basal-like tumors, and mature luminal cells to tumor luminal
A and B tumors cells, with all cells within the tumor being
TICs. The potential cell of origin of HER2-enriched tumors
could be an epithelial cell with an intermediate differentiated
state between the luminal progenitor and the mature luminal
cell, which is what the expression profile of this subtype
suggests.
Although appealing in its simplicity, this hypothesis argues
against other studies that have identified TICs/CSCs
(i.e. CD44þ/CD24 cells) with mesenchymal properties in
a variety of breast tumors and at a low frequency within these
tumors (Creighton et al., 2009; Li et al., 2008; Fillmore and
Kuperwasser, 2008; Sheridan et al., 2006). A second hypothesis
is that the cell of origin for each intrinsic subtype could be the
MaSC (Hypothesis #2, Figure 7C). In this scenario, transformed
MaSC (with Claudin-low/mesenchymal features) would have
the capacity to divide symmetrically and asymmetrically,
with the asymmetric divisions resulting in cell differentiation
with arrest at specific stages of differentiation depending
upon the genetic events present within each particular tumor.
In this context, the bulk of the tumor would be composed of
either luminal progenitor/Basal-like cells, or more differentiated luminal cells, with each molecular subtype having a subpopulation of cells that are mesenchymal/Claudin-low. These
undifferentiated cells within tumors would be more resistant
to treatment and possibly the cells responsible for spread to
distant organs. In the metastatic site, these mesenchymal/
Claudin-low cells would undergo their aberrant differentiation process, which would include an apparent mesenchymaleepithelial transition (MET) as has been described in
embryonic development studies (Chaffer et al., 2007). This,
as well as Hypothesis #1, could explain why distant metastases display the same molecular breast cancer subtype as their
primary tumors (Weigelt et al., 2005).
We have experimentally approached this second hypothesis
by trying to identify epithelial tumor cells with mesenchymal
characteristics across 86 samples, including 20 Claudin-low tumors. In order to do this, we used dual labeling immuno-fluorescence with a pan-keratin epithelial marker and the
mesenchymal marker vimentin. Interestingly, the vast majority of dual positive samples (25/28, 85%) were observed in the
Claudin-low (Figure 2AeC) and Basal-like subtypes, suggesting
that these two tumor subtypes possess epithelial cells with
mesenchymal features. The more differentiated subtypes
(HER2-enriched, Luminal A and B) were either not enriched or
the frequency of these cells was so low that we were unable
to identify them. Moreover, we provided evidence that a fraction
(w10%) of cells within the Basal-like BRCA1-mutated

(genetically and/or via microenvironment influences) render
differentiated cells with MaSC-like features including the ability to
self-renew and divide asymmetrically. Abbreviations: MaSC,
mammary stem cell; MyoProg, myoepithelial progenitor; MatureMyo, mature myoepithelial cells; LumProg, luminal progenitor; LateLP, late luminal progenitor; Mature-L, mature luminal cells.

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

SUM149PT cell line were mesenchymal/Claudin-low cells that
can self-renew and differentiate into Basal-like cells (Prat
et al., 2010). Conversely, we could not identify Claudin-low cells
within the Luminal MCF-7 cell line. Thus, this data argues in favor of the MaSC being the cell of origin of Claudin-low and
Basal-like tumors (as opposed to the luminal progenitor), while
the cell of origin of the more differentiated epithelial tumors
(i.e. Luminal A, B and HER2-enriched) subtypes is not as clear.
A third hypothesis also exists where a molecular subtype
originates in non-stem cell somewhere along the luminal differentiation hierarchy, but that the transformation event imparts self-renewal abilities and mesenchymal features, thus
effectively creating a CSC from a differentiated cell (Chaffer
and Weinberg, 2010; Gupta et al., 2009). In this scenario, the
cells that acquired these CSC characteristics would then symmetrically and asymmetrically divide to create the mixed cell
type containing tumor (Hypothesis #3, Figure 7D). An interesting twist on this hypothesis is that if, for example, a Basal-like/
luminal progenitor type cell is the primary cell type of transformation, then Claudin-low tumors may arise via EMT-inducing event that drives these rare tumors into a more
mesenchymal state. Lastly, and the hypothesis we favor,
some combination of these hypotheses may occur where
Claudin-low and Basal-like tumors arise from transformation
of MaSC (Hypothesis #2) with limited differentiation into luminal progenitors in the case of Basal-like cancers, while the formation of Luminal tumors may occur via transformation of
differentiated cells (Hypothesis #1 and/or #3). Further studies
are clearly required to unambiguously determine the cell of
origin for each intrinsic subtype, however, studies focused
on breast cancer stem cell should consider tumor subtype
when interpreting results as we feel it likely that different
transformation schemes, and cell types of transformation,
may be occurring within different subtypes.

7.

Discussion

In this review, we have dissected the most recent data on the
intrinsic classification of breast cancer with a special focus on
the Claudin-low subtype. Importantly, we show and reiterate
that the information provided by these molecular entities is
not fully recapitulated by the classical pathological markers.
We envision an integration of the intrinsic subtypes with the
four main clinical treatment groups (HRþ/HER2, HRþ/
HER2þ, HR/HER2þ and triple-negative) in order to improve
patient outcomes. In addition, other variables beyond gene
expression and clinical-pathological variables, like gene mutation status or DNA copy number changes, will be needed
to further stratify patients into more precise prognostic and/
or specific treatment groups.
The HRþ/HER2 group of tumors is mainly composed of two
subtypes: Luminal A (good prognosis, chemoresistant and endocrine sensitive) and Luminal B (poor prognosis, mainly chemoresistant and endocrine less sensitive). As discussed above,
a main difference between A vs. B is proliferation status, which
is low in Luminal A and high in Luminal B tumors. In this context, genomic prognostic assays such as the OncoTypeDX and
the NKI 70-gene signature (or even the pathological marker Ki67) have the ability to identify tumors with high risk of

19

recurrence, which are mainly Luminal B tumors. An important
issue here will be to find which ERþ patients benefit from chemotherapy. As suggested by data from neoadjuvant clinical trials, Luminal B tumors benefit more from chemotherapy than
Luminal A tumors, although only less than w20% of Luminal B
patients eventually achieve a pCR. This increased benefit with
the administration of chemotherapy in Luminal B is concordant
with data coming from NSABP-B20 trial where only node-negative HRþ patients with high OncoTypeDX RS benefited from adjuvant chemotherapy (Paik et al., 2006).
In the HRþ/HER2þ group of tumors, two subtypes are
mainly identified: Luminal B and HER2-enriched. Here a major
challenge will be to elucidate differences between the two molecular subtypes in terms of efficacy of chemotherapy, antihormonal therapy, and anti-HER2 therapy. For example, are
HRþ/HER2þ/Luminal B tumors less or more sensitive to antiHER2 therapies than HRþ/HER2þ/HER2-enriched tumors,
and do they respond better to anti-hormonal therapies than
HRþ/HER2þ/HER2-enriched tumors?
Within HR/HER2þ tumors, w50e88% of these fall into the
HER2-enriched subtype, followed by the other poor prognostic
subtypes. Here the challenge will be to determine if HR/
HER2þ that are not of the HER2-enriched subtype, benefit
from anti-HER2 therapies, and if HER2þ tumors that are not of
the HER2-enriched subtype show similar or different response
rates to trastuzumab when compared to HER2þ/HER2-enriched
tumors. Finally, within triple-negative disease, Basal-like and
Claudin-low are the most frequent subtypes identified. Further
studies focusing on the efficacy of particular chemotherapies
and/or targeted therapies such as the PARP inhibitors and/or
anti-CSC therapies in these subgroups of patients are warranted. It will be important to determine if Basal-like and Claudin-low tumors show similar responses to common therapies
as they may given their expression similarities, or they may
not given their differences including vast differences in proliferation rates. Overall, we believe that the information provided
by the intrinsic subtypes, when combined with the current clinical-pathological markers, helps to further explain the biological complexity of breast cancer, should increase the efficacy
of current and novel therapies, and ultimately will improve outcomes for breast cancer patients.

Acknowledgements
We thank Katherine A. Hoadley for critical review of the manuscript. This work was supported by funds from the NCI
Breast SPORE program to UNC-CH (P50-CA58223-09A1), by
NCI RO1-CA-101227, the Breast Cancer Research Foundation
and by the V Foundation for Cancer Research. A. Prat is affiliated to the Internal Medicine PhD program of the Autonomous
University of Barcelona (UAB), Spain.
R E F E R E N C E S

Agus, D.B., Akita, R.W., Fox, W.D., Lewis, G.D., Higgins, B.,
Pisacane, P.I., Lofgren, J.A., Tindell, C., Evans, D.P., Maiese, K.,
Scher, H.I., Sliwkowski, M.X., 2002. Targeting ligand-activated

20

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

ErbB2 signaling inhibits breast and prostate tumor growth.
Cancer Cell 2, 127.
Al Sayed, A.D., El Weshi, A.N., Tulbah, A.M., Rahal, M.M.,
Ezzat, A.A., 2006. Metaplastic carcinoma of the breast clinical
presentation, treatment results and prognostic factors. Acta.
Oncol. 45, 188e195.
Al-Hajj, M., Wicha, M., Benito-Hernandez, A., Morrison, S.,
Clarke, M., 2003. Prospective identification of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 100, 3983e3988.
Benz, C., Scott, G., Sarup, J., Johnson, R., Tripathy, D., Coronado, E.,
Shepard, H., Osborne, C., 1992. Estrogen-dependent, tamoxifenresistant tumorigenic growth of MCF-7 cells transfected with
HER2/neu. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 24, 85e95.
Carey, L.A., Perou, C.M., Livasy, C.A., Dressler, L.G., Cowan, D.,
Conway, K., Karaca, G., Troester, M.A., Tse, C.K., Edmiston, S.,
Deming, S.L., Geradts, J., Cheang, M.C., Nielsen, T.O.,
Moorman, P.G., Earp, H.S., Millikan, R.C., 2006. Race, breast
cancer subtypes, and survival in the Carolina Breast Cancer
Study. JAMA 295, 2492e2502.
Carey, L.A., Dees, E.C., Sawyer, L., Gatti, L., Moore, D.T., Collichio, F.,
Ollila, D.W., Sartor, C.I., Graham, M.L., Perou, C.M., 2007. The
triple negative paradox: primary tumor chemosensitivity of
breast cancer subtypes. Clin. Cancer Res. 13, 2329e2334.
Chaffer, C.L., Weinberg, R.A., 2010. Cancer cell of origin: spotlight
on luminal progenitors. Cell Stem Cell 7, 271e272.
Chaffer, C.L., Thompson, E.W., Williams, E.D., 2007. Mesenchymal
to epithelial transition in development and disease. Cells
Tissues Organs 185, 7.
Charafe-Jauffret, E., Ginestier, C., Lovino, F., Wicinski, J.,
Cervera, N., Finetti, P., Hur, M., Diebel, M., Monville, F.,
Dutcher, J., Brown, M., Viens, P., Xerri, L., Bertucci, F.,
Stassi, G., Dontu, G., Birnbaum, D., Wicha, M., 2009. Breast
cancer cell lines contain functional cancer stem cells with
metastatic capacity and a distinct molecular signature. Cancer
Res. 69, 1302e1313.
Cheang, M., Voduc, D., Bajdik, C., Leung, S., McKinney, S., Chia, S.,
Perou, C., Nielsen, T., 2008. Basal-like breast cancer defined by
five biomarkers has superior prognostic value than triplenegative phenotype. Clin. Cancer Res. 14, 1368e1376.
Cheang, M.C.U., Chia, S.K., Voduc, D., Gao, D., Leung, S., Snider, J.,
Watson, M., Davies, S., Bernard, P.S., Parker, J.S., Perou, C.M.,
Ellis, M.J., Nielsen, T.O., 2009. Ki67 index, HER2 status, and
prognosis of patients with luminal B breast cancer. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 101, 736e750.
Chin, K., DeVries, S., DFridlyand, J., Spellman, P., Roydasqupta, R.,
Kuo, W., Lapuk, A., Neve, R., Quian, Z., Ryder, T., Chen, F.,
Feiler, H., Tokuyasu, T., Gray, J., 2006. Genomic and
transcriptional aberations linked to breast cancer
pathophysiologies. Cancer Cell 10, 529e541.
Creighton, C.J., Li, X., Landis, M., Dixon, J.M., Neumeister, V.M.,
Sjolund, A., Rimm, D.L., Wong, H., Rodriguez, A.,
Herschkowitz, J.I., Fan, C., Zhang, X., He, X., Pavlick, A.,
Gutierrez, M.C., Renshaw, L., Larionov, A.A., Faratian, D.,
Hilsenbeck, S.G., Perou, C.M., Lewis, M.T., Rosen, J.M.,
Chang, J.C., 2009. Residual breast cancers after conventional
therapy display mesenchymal as well as tumor-initiating
features. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 106, 13820e13825.
Cristofanilli, M., Budd, G.T., Ellis, M.J., Stopeck, A., Matera, J.,
Miller, M.C., Reuben, J.M., Doyle, G.V., Allard, W.J.,
Terstappen, L.W.M.M., Hayes, D.F., 2004. Circulating tumor
cells, disease progression, and survival in metastatic breast
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 351, 781e791.
Deisenroth, C., Thorner, A.R., Enomoto, T., Perou, C.M., Zhang, Y.
Mitochondrial HEP27 is a c-Myb target gene that inhibits
Mdm2 and Stabilizes p53. Mol. Cell Biol. 30, 3981e93.
Dennis, G., Sherman, B.T., Hosack, D.A., Yang, J., Gao, W., Lane, H.C.,
Lempicki, R.A., 2003. DAVID: database for annotation,
visualization, and integrated discovery. Genome Biol. 4, R60.

Diehn, M., Cho, R.W., Lobo, N.A., Kalisky, T., Dorie, M.J.,
Kulp, A.N., Qian, D., Lam, J.S., Ailles, L.E., Wong, M., Joshua, B.,
Kaplan, M.J., Wapnir, I., Dirbas, F.M., Somlo, G.,
Garberoglio, C., Paz, B., Shen, J., Lau, S.K., Quake, S.R.,
Brown, J.M., Weissman, I.L., Clarke, M.F., 2009. Association of
reactive oxygen species levels and radioresistance in cancer
stem cells. Nature 458, 780.
Dontu, G., Abdallah, W., Foley, J., Jackson, K., Clarke, M.,
Kawamura, M., Wicha, M., 2003. In vitro propagation and
transcriptional profiling of human mammary stem/progenitor
cells. Genes Dev. 17, 1253e1270.
Dowsett M, Cuzick J, Wales C, Forbes J, Mallon L, Salter J, Quinn E,
Bugarini R, Baehner F, Shak S. Risk of distant recurrence using
oncotype DX in postmenopausal primary breast cancer
patients treated with anastrozole or tamoxifen: a TransATAC
study. San Antonio Breast Cancer Symp. 2008:abstract 53,
(2008).
Eisinger, F., Jacquemier, J., Charpin, C., Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.,
Paillerets, BB-d, Peyrat, J.-P., Longy, M., Guinebretiere, J.-M.,
Sauvan, R., Noguchi, T., Birnbaum, D., Sobol, H., 1998.
Mutations at BRCA1: the medullary breast carcinoma
revisited. Cancer Res. 58, 1588e1592.
Ellis, M.J., Tao, Y., Young, O., White, S., Proia, A.D., Murray, J.,
Renshaw, L., Faratian, D., Thomas, J., Dowsett, M., Krause, A.,
Evans, D.B., Miller, W.R., Dixon, J.M., 2006. EstrogenIndependent proliferation is present in estrogen-receptor
HER2-Positive primary breast cancer after neoadjuvant
letrozole. J. Clin. Oncol. 24, 3019e3025.
Ellis, M.J., Tao, Y., Luo, J., A’Hern, R., Evans, D.B., Bhatnagar, A.S.,
Chaudri Ross, H.A., von Kameke, A., Miller, W.R., Smith, I.,
Eiermann, W., Dowsett, M., 2008. Outcome prediction for
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer based on post
neoadjuvant endocrine therapy tumor characteristics. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 100, 1380e1388.
Elstrodt, F., Hollestelle, A., Nagel, J.H.A., Gorin, M.,
Wasielewski, M., van den Ouweland, A., Merajver, S.D.,
Ethier, S.P., Schutte, M., 2006. BRCA1 mutation analysis of 41
human breast cancer cell lines reveals three new deleterious
mutants. Cancer Res. 66, 41e45.
Esteller, M., Silva, J.M., Dominguez, G., Bonilla, F., Matias-Guiu, X.,
Lerma, E., Bussaglia, E., Prat, J., Harkes, I.C., Repasky, E.A.,
Gabrielson, E., Schutte, M., Baylin, S.B., Herman, J.G., 2000.
Promoter hypermethylation and BRCA1 inactivation in
sporadic breast and ovarian tumors. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 92,
564e569.
Fan, C., Oh, D.S., Wessels, L., Weigelt, B., Nuyten, D.S.A.,
Nobel, A.B., van’t Veer, L.J., Perou, C.M., 2006. Concordance
among gene-Expression-Based predictors for breast cancer. N.
Engl. J. Med. 355, 560e569.
Fillmore, C., Kuperwasser, C., 2008. Human breast cancer cell
lines contain stem-like cells that self-renew, give rise to
phenotypically diverse progeny and survive chemotherapy.
Breast Cancer Res. 10, R25.
Foulkes, W.D., Stefansson, I.M., Chappuis, P.O., Begin, L.R.,
Goffin, J.R., Wong, N., Trudel, M., Akslen, L.A., 2003. Germline
BRCA1 mutations and a basal epithelial phenotype in breast
cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 95, 1482e1485.
Ginestier, C., Hur, M., Charafe-Jauffret, E., Monville, F., Dutcher, J.,
Brown, M., Jacquemier, J., Viens, P., Kleer, C., Liu, S., Schott, A.,
Hayes, D., Birnbaum, D., Wicha, M., Dontu, G., 2007. ALDH1 is
a marker of normal and malignant human mammary stem
cells and a predictor of poor clinical outcome. Cell Stem Cell 1,
555e567.
Ginestier, C., Liu, S., Diebel, M.E., Korkaya, H., Luo, M., Brown, M.,
Wicinski, J., Cabaud, O., Charafe-Jauffret, E., Birnbaum, D.,
Guan, J.-L., Dontu, G., Wicha, M.S., 2010. CXCR1 blockade
selectively targets human breast cancer stem cells in vitro and
in xenografts. J. Clin. Invest.

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

Gupta, P., Onder, T., Jiang, G., Tao, K., Kuperwasser, C.,
Weinberg, R., Lander, E., 2009. Identification of selective
inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput screening.
Cell 138, 645e659.
Gupta, P.B., Chaffer, C.L., Weinberg, R.A., 2009. Cancer stem cells:
mirage or reality? Nat. Med. 15, 1010e1012.
Hackett, A., Smith, H., Springer, E., Owens, R., Nelson-Rees, W.,
Riggs, J., Gardner, M., 1977. Two syngeneic cell lines from
human breast tissue: the aneuploid mammary epithelial
(Hs578T) and the diploid myoepithelial (Hs578Bst) cell lines.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 58, 1795e1806.
Hennessy, B.T., Krishnamurthy, S., Giordano, S., Buchholz, T.A.,
Kau, S.W., Duan, Z., Valero, V., Hortobagyi, G.N., 2005.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the breast. J. Clin. Oncol. 23,
7827e7835.
Hennessy, B., Gonzalez-Angulo, A., Stemke-Hale, K., Gilcrease,
M., Krishnamurthy, S., Lee, J., Fridlyand, J., Mills, G.
Characterization of a naturally occurring breast cancer subset
enriched in EMT and stem cell characteristics. Cancer Res., in
press.
Herschkowitz, J., Simin, K., Weigman, V., Mikaelian, I., Usary, J.,
Hu, Z., Rasmussen, K., Jones, L., Assefnia, S.,
Chandrasekharan, S., Backlund, M., Yin, Y., Khramtsov, A.,
Bastein, R., Quackenbush, J., Glazer, R., Brown, P., Green, J.,
Kopelovich, L., Furth, P., Palazzo, J., Olopade, O., Bernard, P.,
Churchill, G., Van Dyke, T., Perou, C., 2007. Identification of
conserved gene expression features between murine
mammary carcinoma models and human breast tumors.
Genome Biol. 8, R76.
Hess, K.R., Anderson, K., Symmans, W.F., Valero, V., Ibrahim, N.,
Mejia, J.A., Booser, D., Theriault, R.L., Buzdar, A.U.,
Dempsey, P.J., Rouzier, R., Sneige, N., Ross, J.S., Vidaurre, T.,
Gomez, H.L., Hortobagyi, G.N., Pusztai, L., 2006.
Pharmacogenomic predictor of sensitivity to preoperative
chemotherapy with paclitaxel and fluorouracil, doxorubicin,
and cyclophosphamide in breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 24,
4236e4244.
Hollestelle, A., Nagel, J., Smid, M., Lam, S., Elstrodt, F.,
Wasielewski, M., Ng, S., French, P., Peeters, J., Rozendaal, M.,
Riaz, M., Koopman, D., ten Hagen, T., de Leeuw, B.,
Zwarthoff, E., Teunisse, A., van der Spek, P., Klijn, J.,
Dinjens, W., Ethier, S., Clevers, H., Jochemsen, A., den
Bakker, M., Foekens, J., Martens, J., Schutte, M., 2009. Distinct
gene mutation profiles among luminal-type and basal-type
breast cancer cell lines. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. [Epub ahead
of print].
Honeth, G., Bendahl, P.-O., Ringner, M., Saal, L., GruvbergerSaal, S., Lovgren, K., Grabau, D., Ferno, M., Borg, A.,
Hegardt, C., 2008. The CD44þ/CD24 phenotype is enriched in
basal-like breast tumors. Breast Cancer Res. 10, R53.
Houston, S., Plunkett, T., Barnes, D., Smith, P., Rubens, R.,
Miles, D., 1999. Overexpression of c-erbB2 is an independent
marker of resistance to endocrine therapy in advanced breast
cancer. Br. J. Cancer 79 (7e8), 1220e1226.
Hu, Z., Cheng, F., Oh, D.S., Marron, J.S., He, X., Qaqish, B.F.,
Livasy, C., Carey, L.A., Reynolds, E., Dressler, L., Nobel, A.,
Parker, J., Ewend, M.G., Sawyer, L.R., Wu, J., Liu, Y., Nanda, R.,
Tretiakova, M., Orrico, A.R., Dreher, D., Palazzo, J.P.,
Perreard, L., Nelson, E., Mone, M., Hansen, H., Mullins, M.,
Quackenbush, J.F., Ellis, M.J., Olopade, O.I., Bernard, P.S.,
Perou, C.M., 2006. The molecular portraits of breast tumors are
conserved across microarray platforms. BMC Genomics 7, 96.
Hugh, J., Hanson, J., Cheang, M.C.U., Nielsen, T.O., Perou, C.M.,
Dumontet, C., Reed, J., Krajewska, M., Treilleux, I., Rupin, M.,
Magherini, E., Mackey, J., Martin, M., Vogel, C., 2009. Breast
cancer subtypes and response to docetaxel in node-positive
breast cancer: use of an immunohistochemical definition in
the BCIRG 001 trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 1168e1176.

21

Jemal, A., Siegel, R., Ward, E., Hao, Y., Xu, J., Thun, M.J., 2009.
Cancer statistics, 2009. CA Cancer J. Clin. 59, 225e249.
Johnston, S., Pippen Jr., J., Pivot, X., Lichinitser, M., Sadeghi, S.,
Dieras, V., Gomez, H.L., Romieu, G., Manikhas, A.,
Kennedy, M.J., Press, M.F., Maltzman, J., Florance, A.,
O’Rourke, L., Oliva, C., Stein, S., Pegram, M., 2009. Lapatinib
combined with letrozole versus letrozole and placebo as firstline therapy for postmenopausal hormone receptor-positive
metastatic breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 5538e5546.
Jordan, C.T., 2009. Cancer stem cells: controversial or just
misunderstood? Cell Stem Cell 4, 203.
Kaufman, B., Mackey, J., Clemens, M., Bapsy, P., Vaid, A.,
Wardley, A., Tjulandin, S., Jahn, M., Lehle, M., Jones, A., 2006.
Trastuzumab Plus Anastrozole Prolongs Progression-free
Survival in Postmenopausal Women with HER2-positive,
Hormone-dependent Metastatic Breast Cancer Proc. San
Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium: a.
Kenny, P.A., Lee, G.Y., Myers, C.A., Neve, R.M., Semeiks, J.R.,
Spellman, P.T., Lorenz, K., Lee, E.H., Barcellos-Hoff, M.H.,
Petersen, O.W., Gray, J.W., Bissell, M.J., 2007. The morphologies
of breast cancer cell lines in three-dimensional assays correlate
with their profiles of gene expression. Mol. Oncol. 1, 84e96.
Kim, M.-Y., Oskarsson, T., Acharyya, S., Nguyen, D.X.,
, J., 2009. Tumor selfZhang, X.H.F., Norton, L., Massague
Seeding by circulating cancer cells. Cell 139, 1315.
La Vecchia, C., Bosetti, C., Lucchini, F., Bertuccio, P., Negri, E.,
Boyle, P., Levi, F. Cancer mortality in Europe, 2000e2004, and
an overview of trends since 1975. Ann. Oncol., in press.
Lakhani, S.R., Jacquemier, J., Sloane, J.P., Gusterson, B.A.,
Anderson, T.J., van de Vijver, M.J., Farid, L.M., Venter, D.,
Antoniou, A., Storfer-Isser, A., Smyth, E., Steel, C.M.,
Haites, N., Scott, R.J., Goldgar, D., Neuhausen, S., Daly, P.A.,
Ormiston, W., McManus, R., Scherneck, S., Ponder, B.A.,
Ford, D., Peto, J., Stoppa-Lyonnet, D., Easton, D.F., 1998.
Multifactorial analysis of differences between sporadic breast
cancers and cancers involving BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 90, 1138e1145.
Li, X., Lewis, M.T., Huang, J., Gutierrez, C., Osborne, C.K., Wu, M.F., Hilsenbeck, S.G., Pavlick, A., Zhang, X., Chamness, G.C.,
Wong, H., Rosen, J., Chang, J.C., 2008. Intrinsic resistance of
tumorigenic breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 100, 672e679.
Liedtke, C., Mazouni, C., Hess, K.R., Andre, F., Tordai, A.,
Mejia, J.A., Symmans, W.F., Gonzalez-Angulo, A.M.,
Hennessy, B., Green, M., Cristofanilli, M., Hortobagyi, G.N.,
Pusztai, L., 2008. Response to neoadjuvant therapy and longterm survival in patients with triple-negative breast cancer.
J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 1275e1281.
Lim, E., Vaillant, F., Wu, D., Forrest, N.C., Pal, B., Hart, A.H.,
Asselin-Labat, M.-L., Gyorki, D.E., Ward, T., Partanen, A.,
Feleppa, F., Huschtscha, L.I., Thorne, H.J., Fox, S.B., Yan, M.,
French, J.D., Brown, M.A., Smyth, G.K., Visvader, J.E.,
Lindeman, G.J., 2009. Aberrant luminal progenitors as the
candidate target population for basal tumor development in
BRCA1 mutation carriers. Nat. Med. 15, 907.
Lipton, A., Ali, S.M., Leitzel, K., Demers, L., Harvey, H.A., ChaudriRoss, H.A., Brady, C., Wyld, P., Carney, W., 2003. Serum HER-2/
neu and response to the aromatase inhibitor letrozole versus
tamoxifen. J. Clin. Oncol. 21, 1967e1972.
Liu, R., Wang, X., Chen, G.Y., Dalerba, P., Gurney, A., Hoey, T.,
Sherlock, G., Lewicki, J., Shedden, K., Clarke, M.F., 2007. The
prognostic role of a gene signature from tumorigenic breastcancer cells. N. Engl. J. Med. 356, 217e226.
Loi, S., Haibe-Kains, B., Desmedt, C., Wirapati, P., Lallemand, F.,
Tutt, A., Gillet, C., Ellis, P., Ryder, K., Reid, J., Daidone, M.,
Pierotti, M., Berns, E., Jansen, M., Foekens, J., Delorenzi, M.,
Bontempi, G., Piccart, M., Sotiriou, C., 2008. Predicting
prognosis using molecular profiling in estrogen receptor-

22

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

positive breast cancer treated with tamoxifen. BMC Genomics
9, 239.
Loi, S., Sotiriou, C., Haibe-Kains, B., Lallemand, F., Conus, N.,
Piccart, M., Speed, T., McArthur, G., 2009. Gene expression
profiling identifies activated growth factor signaling in poor
prognosis (Luminal-B) estrogen receptor positive breast
cancer. BMC Med. Genomics 2, 37.
Mani, S.A., Guo, W., Liao, M.-J., Eaton, E.N., Ayyanan, A.,
Zhou, A.Y., Brooks, M., Reinhard, F., Zhang, C.C., Shipitsin, M.,
Campbell, L.L., Polyak, K., Brisken, C., Yang, J., Weinberg, R.A.,
2008. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition Generates cells
with properties of stem cells. Cell 133, 704e715.
McDermott, S.P., Wicha, M.S., 2010. Targeting breast cancer stem
cells. Mol. Oncol. 4, 404e419.
Menendez, J.A., Mehmi, I., Lupu, R., 2006. Trastuzumab in
combination with heregulin-activated Her-2 (erbB-2) triggers
a receptor-enhanced chemosensitivity effect in the absence of
Her-2 overexpression. J. Clin. Oncol. 24, 3735e3746.
Millikan, R., Newman, B., Tse, C.-K., Moorman, P., Conway, K.,
Smith, L., Labbok, M., Geradts, J., Bensen, J., Jackson, S.,
Nyante, S., Livasy, C., Carey, L., Earp, H., Perou, C., 2008.
Epidemiology of basal-like breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res.
Treat. 109, 123e139.
Minn, A., Gupta, G., Siegel, P., Bos, P., Shu, W., Giri, D., Viale, A.,
Oshen, A., Gerald, W., Massague, J., 2005. Genes that mediate
breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature 436, 518e524.
Molyneux, G., Geyer, F., Magnay, F., McCarthy, A., Kendrick, H.,
Natrajan, R., Mackay, A., Grigoriadis, A., Tutt, A., Ashworth, A.,
Reis-Filho, J., Mj, S., 2010. BRCA1 basal-like breast cancers
originate from luminal epithelial progenitors and not from
basal stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 3, 403e417.
vre, M., Thomas, Cm, Hinkal, G., Ansieau, Sp,
Morel, A.-P., Lie
Puisieux, A., 2008. Generation of breast cancer stem cells
through epithelial-mesenchymal transition. PLoS ONE 3,
e2888.
Neve, R., Chin, K., Fridlyand, J., Yeh, J., Baehner, F.L., Fevr, T., Gray, J.,
2006. A collection of breast cancer cell lines for the study of
functionally distinct cancer subtypes. Cancer Cell 10, 515e527.
Nielsen, T.O., Hsu, F.D., Jensen, K., Cheang, M., Karaca, G., Hu, Z.,
Hernandez-Boussard, T., Livasy, C., Cowan, D., Dressler, L.,
Akslen, L.A., Ragaz, J., Gown, A.M., Gilks, C.B., van De Rijn, M.,
Perou, C.M., 2004. Immunohistochemical and clinical
characterization of the basal-like subtype of invasive breast
carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 10, 3574e5367.
Nielsen, T.O., Parker, J.S., Leung, S., Voduc, K.D., Ebbert, M.,
Vickery, T.L., Davies, S.R., Snider, J.E., Stijleman, I.J., Reed, J.,
Cheang, M.C.U., Mardis, E.R., Perou, C.M., Bernard, P.S.,
Ellis, M.J., 2010. A comparison of PAM50 intrinsic subtyping
with immunohistochemistry and clinical prognostic factors in
tamoxifen-treated estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.
Clin. Cancer Res. 16, 5222e5232.
Osborne, C.K., Schiff, R., 2005. Estrogen-receptor biology:
continuing progress and therapeutic implications. J. Clin.
Oncol. 23, 1616e1622.
O’Shaughnessy, L., Osborne, C., Pippen, J., Yoffe, M., Patt, D.,
Monaghan, G., Rocha, C., Ossovskaya, V., Sherman, B.,
Bradley, C., 2009. Efficacy of BSI-201, a poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP1) inhibitor, in combination with
gemcitabine/carboplatin (G/C) in patients with metastatic
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC): results of a randomized
phase II trial. Proc. Am Soc Clin. Oncol. a.
Paik, S., Shak, S., Tang, G., Kim, C., Baker, J., Cronin, M.,
Baehner, F.L., Walker, M.G., Watson, D., Park, T., 2004. A
multigene assay to predict recurrence of tamoxifen-treated,
node-negative breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 351, 2817e2826.
Paik, S., Tang, G., Shak, S., Kim, C., Baker, J., Kim, W., Cronin, M.,
Baehner, F.L., Watson, D., Bryant, J., Costantino, J.P.,
Geyer Jr., C.E., Wickerham, D.L., Wolmark, N., 2006. Gene

expression and benefit of chemotherapy in women with nodenegative, estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. J. Clin.
Oncol. 24, 3726e3734.
Paik, S., Kim, C., Wolmark, N., 2008. HER2 status and benefit from
adjuvant trastuzumab in breast cancer. New Engl. J. Med. 358,
1409e1411.
Parker J, Prat A, Cheang M, Lenburg M, Paik S, Perou C. Breast
Cancer Molecular Subtypes Predict Response to
Anthracycline/taxane-based Chemotherapy. San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium 2009a:(abstract 2019).
Parker, J.S., Mullins, M., Cheang, M.C.U., Leung, S., Voduc, D.,
Vickery, T., Davies, S., Fauron, C., He, X., Hu, Z.,
Quackenbush, J.F., Stijleman, I.J., Palazzo, J., Marron, J.S.,
Nobel, A.B., Mardis, E., Nielsen, T.O., Ellis, M.J., Perou, C.M.,
Bernard, P.S., 2009b. Supervised risk predictor of breast cancer
based on intrinsic subtypes. J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 1160e1167.
Peppercorn, J., Perou, C., Carey, L., 2008. Molecular subtypes in
breast cancer evaluation and management: divide and
Conquer. Cancer Invest. 26, 1e10.
Perou, C.M., Sorlie, T., Eisen, M.B., van de Rijn, M., Jeffrey, S.S.,
Rees, C.A., Pollack, J.R., Ross, D.T., Johnsen, H., Akslen, L.A.,
2000. Molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature
406, 747e752.
Piccart-Gebhart, M.J., Procter, M., Leyland-Jones, B.,
Goldhirsch, A., Untch, M., Smith, I., Gianni, L., Baselga, J.,
Bell, R., Jackisch, C., Cameron, D., Dowsett, M., Barrios, C.H.,
Steger, G., Huang, C.-S., Andersson, M., Inbar, M.,
Lichinitser, M., Lang, I., Nitz, U., Iwata, H., Thomssen, C.,
Lohrisch, C., Suter, T.M., Ruschoff, J., Suto, T., Greatorex, V.,
Ward, C., Straehle, C., McFadden, E., Dolci, M.S.,
Gelber, R.D.the Herceptin Adjuvant Trial Study T, 2005.
Trastuzumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-Positive
breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 1659e1672.
Pietras, R., Arboleda, J., Reese, D., Wongvipat, N., Pegram, M.,
Ramos, L., Gorman, C., Parker, M., Sliwkowski, M., Slamon, D.,
1995. HER-2 tyrosine kinase pathway targets estrogen receptor
and promotes hormone-independent growth in human breast
cancer cells. Oncogene 10, 2435e2446.
Podo, F., Buydens, L.M.C., Degani, H., Hilhorst, R., Klipp, E.,
Gribbestad, I.S., Van Huffel, S., W.M. van Laarhoven, H., Luts,
J., Monleon, D., Postma, G.J, Schneiderhan-Marra, N., Santoro,
F., Wouters, H., Russnes, H.G., Sørlie, T., Tagliabue, E.,
Børresen-Dale, A.-L. Triple-negative breast cancer: present
challenges and new perspectives. Mol. Oncol. 4, 209e29.
Prat, A., Perou, C.M., 2009. Mammary development meets cancer
genomics. Nat. Med. 15, 842.
Prat, A., Parker, J., Karginova, O., Fan, C., Livasy, C.,
Herschkowitz, J., He, X., Perou, C., 2010. Phenotypic and
molecular characterization of the claudin-low intrinsic
subtype of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 12, R68.
Raouf, A., Zhao, Y., To, K., Stingl, J., Delaney, A., Barbara, M.,
Iscove, N., Jones, S., McKinney, S., Emerman, J., Aparicio, S.,
Marra, M., Eaves, C., 2008. Transcriptome analysis of the
normal human mammary cell commitment and
differentiation process. Cell Stem Cell 3, 109e118.
Resetkova, E., Reis-Filho, J., Jain, R., Mehta, R., Thorat, M.,
Nakshatri, H., Badve, S. Prognostic impact of ALDH1 in breast
cancer: a story of stem cells and tumor microenvironment.
Breast Cancer Res. Treat., in press.
Ridolfi, R., Rosen, P., Port, A., Kinne, D., Mike, V., 1977. Medullary
carcinoma of the breast. A clinicopathologic study with 10
year follow-up. Cancer 40, 1365e1385.
Romond, E.H., Perez, E.A., Bryant, J., Suman, V.J., Geyer Jr., C.E.,
Davidson, N.E., Tan-Chiu, E., Martino, S., Paik, S.,
Kaufman, P.A., Swain, S.M., Pisansky, T.M., Fehrenbacher, L.,
Kutteh, L.A., Vogel, V.G., Visscher, D.W., Yothers, G.,
Jenkins, R.B., Brown, A.M., Dakhil, S.R., Mamounas, E.P.,
Lingle, W.L., Klein, P.M., Ingle, J.N., Wolmark, N., 2005.

M O L E C U L A R O N C O L O G Y 5 ( 2 0 1 1 ) 5 e2 3

Trastuzumab plus adjuvant chemotherapy for operable HER2positive breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 1673e1684.
Rosen, J.M., Jordan, C.T., 2009. The increasing complexity of the
cancer stem cell paradigm. Science 324, 1670e1673.
Rottenberg, S., Jaspers, J., Kersbergen, A., van der Burg, E.,
Nygren, A., Zander, S., Derksen, P., de Bruin, M.,
Zevenhoven, J., Lau, A., Boulter, R., Cranston, A., O’Connor, M.,
Martin, N., Borst, P., Jonkers, J., 2008. High sensitivity of
BRCA1-deficient mammary tumors to the PARP inhibitor
AZD2281 alone and in combination with platinum drugs. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 105, 17079e17084.
Rouzier, R., Perou, C., Symmans, W., Ibrahim, N., Cristofanilli, M.,
Anderson, K., Hess, K., Stec, J., Ayers, M., Wagner, P.,
Morandi, P., Fan, C., Rabiul, I., Ross, J., Hortobagyi, G.,
Pusztai, L., 2005a. Breast cancer molecular subtypes respond
differently to preoperative chemotherapy. Clin. Cancer Res.
11, 5678e5685.
Rouzier, R., Pusztai, L., Delaloge, S., Gonzalez-Angulo, A.M.,
Andre, F., Hess, K.R., Buzdar, A.U., Garbay, J.-R.,
Spielmann, M., Mathieu, M.-C., Symmans, W.F., Wagner, P.,
Atallah, D., Valero, V., Berry, D.A., Hortobagyi, G.N., 2005b.
Nomograms to predict pathologic complete response and
metastasis-free survival after preoperative chemotherapy for
breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 23, 8331e8339.
Santisteban, M., Reiman, J.M., Asiedu, M.K., Behrens, M.D.,
Nassar, A., Kalli, K.R., Haluska, P., Ingle, J.N., Hartmann, L.C.,
Manjili, M.H., Radisky, D.C., Ferrone, S., Knutson, K.L., 2009.
Immune-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition in vivo
generates breast cancer stem cells. Cancer Res. 69, 2887e2895.
Sheridan, C., Kishimoto, H., Fuchs, R., Mehrotra, S., BhatNakshatri, P., Turner, C., Goulet, R., Badve, S., Nakshatri, H.,
2006. CD44þ/CD24 breast cancer cells exhibit enhanced
invasive properties: an early step necessary for metastasis.
Breast Cancer Res. 8, R59.
Shipitsin, M., Campbell, L., Argani, P., Weremowicz, S.,
Bloushtain-Qimron, N., Yao, J., Nikolskaya, T.,
Serebryiskaya, T., Beroukhim, R., Hu, M., Halushka, M.,
Sukumar, S., Parker, L., Anderson, K., Harris, L., Garber, J.,
Richardson, A., Schnitt, S., Nikolsky, Y., Gelman, R., Polyak, K.,
2007. Molecular definition of breast tumor heterogeneity.
Cancer Cell 11, 259e273.
Sieuwerts, A., Kraan, J., Bolt, J., Van der Spoel, P., Elstrodt, F.,
Schutte, M., Martens, J., Gratama, J., Sleijfer, S., Foekens, J.,
2009. Anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule antibodies and
the detection of circulating normal-like breast tumor cells.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 101, 61e66.
Sorlie, T., Perou, C.M., Tibshirani, R., Aas, T., Geisler, S.,
Johnsen, H., Hastie, T., Eisen, M.B., van de Rijn, M., Jeffrey, S.S.,
2001. Gene expression patterns of breast carcinomas
distinguish tumor subclasses with clinical implications. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 98, 10869e10874.
Sotiriou, C., Wirapati, P., Loi, S., Harris, A., Fox, S., Smeds, J.,
Nordgren, H., Farmer, P., Praz, V., Haibe-Kains, B., 2006. Gene

23

expression profiling in breast cancer: understanding the
molecular basis of histologic grade to improve prognosis.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 98, 262e272.
Suspitsin, E., Sokolenko, A., Voskresenskiy, D., Ivantsov, A.,
Shelehova, K., Klimashevskiy, V., Matsko, D., Semiglazov, V.,
Imyanitov, E., 2009 Apr 7. Mixed epithelial/mesenchymal
metaplastic carcinoma (carcinosarcoma) of the breast in
BRCA1 carrier. Breast Cancer [Epub ahead of print].
Taube, J.H., Herschkowitz, J.I., Komurov, K., Zhou, A.Y., Gupta, S.,
Yang, J., Hartwell, K., Onder, T.T., Gupta, P.B., Evans, K.W.,
Hollier, B.G., Ram, P.T., Lander, E.S., Rosen, J.M.,
Weinberg, R.A., Mani, S.A., 2010. Core epithelial-tomesenchymal transition interactome gene-expression
signature is associated with claudin-low and metaplastic
breast cancer subtypes. PNAS 107, 15449e15454.
Turner, N.C., Reis-Filho, J.S., Russell, A.M., Springall, R.J.,
Ryder, K., Steele, D., Savage, K., Gillett, C.E., Schmitt, F.C.,
Ashworth, A., Tutt, A.N., 2006. BRCA1 dysfunction in sporadic
basal-like breast cancer. Oncogene 26, 2126.
van de Vijver, M.J., He, Y.D., van’t Veer, L.J., Dai, H., Hart, A.A.,
Voskuil, D.W., Schreiber, G.J., Peterse, J.L., Roberts, C.,
Marton, M.J., Parrish, M., Atsma, D., Witteveen, A., Glas, A.,
Delahaye, L., van der Velde, T., Bartelink, H., Rodenhuis, S.,
Rutgers, E.T., Friend, S.H., Bernards, R., 2002. A geneexpression signature as a predictor of survival in breast
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 347, 1999e2009.
van ’t Veer, L.J., Dai, H., van de Vijver, M.J., He, Y.D., Hart, A.A.,
Mao, M., Peterse, H.L., van der Kooy, K., Marton, M.J.,
Witteveen, A.T., 2002. Gene expression profiling predicts
clinical outcome of breast cancer. Nature 415, 530e536.
Visvader, J., 2009. Keeping abreast of the mammary epithelial
hierarchy and breast tumorigenesis. Genes Dev. 23,
2563e2577.
Vu-Nishino, H., Tavassoli, F.A., Ahrens, W.A., Haffty, B.G., 2005.
Clinicopathologic features and long-term outcome of patients
with medullary breast carcinoma managed with breastconserving therapy (BCT). Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 62,
1040.
Weigelt, B., Hu, Z., He, X., Livasy, C., Carey, L.A., Ewend, M.G.,
Glas, A.M., Perou, C.M., van’t Veer, L.J., 2005. Molecular
portraits and 70-gene prognosis signature are preserved
throughout the metastatic process of breast cancer. Cancer
Res. 65, 9155e9158.
Weigelt, B., Horlings, H.M., Kreike, B., Hayes, M.M.,
Hauptmann, M., Wessels, L.F.A., Jong, Dd, Vijver, MJVd,
Veer, LJVt, Peterse, J.L., 2008. Refinement of breast cancer
classification by molecular characterization of histological
special types. J. Pathol. 216, 141e150.
WHO Classification of Tumors, 2003. Lyon Press.
Young, R., Cailleau, R., Mackay, B., Reeves, W., 1974.
Establishment of epithelial cell line MDA-MB-157 from
metastatic pleural effusion of human breast carcinoma. In
Vitro 9, 239e245.

