Breast Cancer Treatment


Breast cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer in women worldwide, and the second most
common cause of death from cancer in women in the United States. Risk assessment tools can identify
the risk of breast cancer, and patients at high risk may be candidates for risk-reducing medications. The
choice of medication varies with menopausal status. Breast cancer treatment depends on the stage.
Stage 0 is ductal carcinoma in situ, which is noninvasive but progresses to invasive cancer in up to 40%
of patients. Ductal carcinoma in situ is treated with lumpectomy and radiation or with mastectomy. If
ductal carcinoma in situ is estrogen receptor–positive, patients may also receive endocrine therapy.
Early invasive stages (I, IIa, IIb) and locally advanced stages (IIIa, IIIb, IIIc) are nonmetastatic and have
three treatment phases. The preoperative phase uses systemic endocrine or immunotherapies when
tumors express estrogen, progesterone, or ERBB2 receptors. Preoperative chemotherapy may also be
used and is the only option when tumors have none of those three receptors. There are two options for
the surgical phase with similar survival rates;​a lumpectomy with radiation if the tumor can be excised
completely with good cosmetic results, or a mastectomy. Sentinel lymph node biopsy is also performed
when there is suspected nodal disease. The postoperative phase includes radiation, endocrine therapy,
immunotherapy, and chemotherapy. Postmenopausal women should also be offered postoperative
bisphosphonates. Stage IV (metastatic) breast cancer is treatable but not curable. Treatment goals
include improving the length and quality of life. 
Breast cancer is the second most common can- Breast Cancer Risk Factors and Riskcer diagnosed in women, exceeded only by nonmelanoma skin cancer. It is the leading cause of death
from cancer in women worldwide. In the United
States, breast cancer is the second most common
cause of death from cancer in women, exceeded
only by lung cancer, with approximately 316,000
patients diagnosed with breast cancer annually.
The treatment of breast cancer requires a multidisciplinary team of specialists in medical, surgical, and radiation oncology. Because most breast
cancers are identified by mammography or by
physical examination, primary care physicians
are often the first contact for patients with a new
breast cancer diagnosis.3 Primary care physicians
should be familiar with the diagnostic workup
for breast cancer and the basics of treatment.
CME This clinical content conforms to AAFP criteria for CME


Reduction Strategies
Risk factors associated with breast cancer include
older age, female sex, early menarche, late menopause, nulliparity, lack of breastfeeding, positive
BEST PRACTICES IN ONCOLOGY
Recommendations from the Choosing
Wisely Campaign
Recommendation

Sponsoring organization

Do not routinely recommend
follow-up mammography more
often than annually for women
who have had radiotherapy following breast-conserving surgery.



BREAST CANCER TREATMENT

family history, dense breast tissue, horSORT:​KEY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE
mone therapy, and a history of radiation therapy to the chest.
Evidence
Genetic variants associated with an
Clinical
recommendation
rating
Comments
increased risk of breast cancer include
mutations in breast cancer genes susAfter a histologic diagnosis of breast cancer,
C
Consensus and
all pathology samples should be identified for
expert opinion
ceptibility (BRCA1/2) genes. 
estrogen, progesterone, or ERBB2 receptor staValidated risk assessment tools such
tus to direct treatment. 24,25
as the Ontario Family History AssessSentinel lymph node biopsy is preferred over
C
Clinical guideline
ment Tool or the Seven Questions Famaxillary lymph node dissection for patients withbased on systematic
ily History Screening can help identify
out clinical evidence of nodal disease. 30
review of random women at risk of BRCA1/2 gene mutaized controlled trials
tions or other genetic risks and guide
Patients with advanced breast cancer and metasC
Consensus and
screening and genetic counseling.5
tases to the bones should be offered treatment
expert opinion
The National Cancer Institute’s
with denosumab (Prolia) or bisphosphonates
Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool
such as zoledronic acid (Reclast) or pamidronate
(Aredia). 24

can
provide an estimate of breast canFor locally recurrent breast cancer initially
C
Consensus and
cer risk over the next five years, but
treated with breast conserving therapy (i.e.,
expert opinion
the tool is not intended to assess risk
lumpectomy plus radiation), further radiation
is not recommended;​total mastectomy is the
in patients with BRCA1/2 gene mutastandard of care. 
 Patients with a greater than 3%
risk of breast cancer over the next five
A = consistent, good-quality patient-oriented evidence;​ B = inconsistent or limited-quality
patient-oriented evidence;​ C = consensus, disease-oriented evidence, usual practice, expert
years are considered to be at increased
opinion, or case series. 


Risk-reducing medications, including the selective estrogen receptor modulators tamoxifen and raloxifene (Evista), or the
Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is stage 0, noninvasive
aromatase inhibitors anastrozole (Arimidex), letrozole breast cancer. Early invasive cancer describes stages I, IIa,
(Femara), and exemestane (Aromasin), may be used to and IIb, and locally advanced describes stages IIIa, IIIb, and
treat postmenopausal women 35 years or older who are at IIIc. All of these stages of breast cancer are nonmetastatic.
increased risk of breast cancer and at low risk of adverse Stage IV is metastatic breast cancer.23 Treatments for the varmedication effects7 (Table 18-18). In premenopausal women, ious stages of breast cancer are summarized in 
only tamoxifen should be used for the prevention of priStage 0, DCIS, Noninvasive Breast Cancer
mary breast cancer.
Bilateral risk-reducing mastectomy may be offered for DCIS is a form of pure, noninvasive carcinoma and is most
patients at particularly high risk (e.g., BRCA1/2 gene carri- commonly identified by mammography showing microcalers or carriers of other high-risk, high-penetrance genes).cifications confined to the breast ducts.26 If left untreated, up
There are some data to suggest that bilateral risk-reducing to 40% of DCIS cases will progress to invasive breast cancer.
mastectomy results in lower rates of invasive breast cancer
DCIS is treated with lumpectomy (with a goal of 2-mm
and lower mortality rates in high-risk populations.20-22
surgical margins) and radiation or with mastectomy.Sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy is done at the time of masBreast Cancer Staging and Classification
tectomy to detect the (unlikely) possibility of lymph node
Breast cancer staging is determined by tumor size, nodal involvement. After mastectomy, an SLN biopsy may not be
involvement, the presence of metastases, and specific bio- technically possible.
markers such as estrogen receptors, progesterone recepRadiation therapy is offered to patients having a lumpectors, and the ERBB2 receptor (formerly HER2). After a tomy;​the combination of lumpectomy with radiation is
histologic diagnosis of breast cancer, all pathology samples considered a breast-conserving therapy. Radiation may be
should be tested for estrogen receptors, progesterone recep- deferred for patients with small, low-grade lesions assessed
tors, and ERBB2 status. Breast cancers that express none to have a low risk of recurrence. Radiation is not indicated
of these markers are referred to as triple-negative.
for patients who are treated with mastectomy.


BREAST CANCER TREATMENT


Agent

Mechanism of action

Bone-modifying agents

Bisphosphonates:​

Inhibits osteoclast activity induced by tumors,
decreasing bone resorption

Clodronate

Common toxicities
and adverse effects
Fatigue
Heartburn

Pamidronate (Aredia)

Nausea, vomiting

Zoledronic acid (Reclast)

Osteonecrosis of jaw

Denosumab (Prolia)

Monoclonal antibody with affinity for nuclear factor
kappa ligand prevents osteoclast formation, leading
to decreased bone resorption

Fatigue
Hypophosphatemia
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Peripheral edema

Chemotherapy

Alkylating agents:​
Carboplatin (Paraplatin)

Covalently binds to DNA, interfering with its normal
functions

Cyclophosphamide
Anthracyclines:​
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin)

Bone marrow suppression
Electrolyte abnormalities
Nausea, vomiting

Inhibits DNA replication and creates free radicals that
further damage cancer cells

Acute and delayed
cardiotoxicity
Alopecia

Epirubicin (Ellence)

Myelosuppression
Nausea, vomiting
Taxanes:​
Docetaxel (Taxotere)

Inhibits microtubule disassembly during mitosis,
preventing cell division

Paclitaxel (Taxol)

Alopecia
Flushing
Myelosuppression
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Peripheral neuropathy

Endocrine
therapy

Aromatase inhibitors:​
Anastrozole (Arimidex)
Exemestane (Aromasin)

Inhibits the enzyme aromatase, which prevents the
conversion of androstenedione to estrone, and of
testosterone to estradiol

Hot flashes

Competitively binds to estrogen receptors on tumor
cells

Hot flashes

Letrozole (Femara)
Selective estrogen receptor modulators:​
Raloxifene (Evista)
Tamoxifen
Immunotherapy

ERBB2-targeted monoclonal antibodies:​
Pertuzumab (Perjeta)

Myalgias
Osteoporosis-related
bone fractures

Increased risk of
thromboembolism
Increased risk of uterine
cancer

Monoclonal antibody that targets the extracellular
domain of ERBB2, thereby preventing activation of
downstream signaling pathways

Trastuzumab (Herceptin)

Alopecia
Fatigue
Left heart dysfunction
Myelosuppression
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea

Neratinib (Nerlynx)

Irreversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor of ERBB2 that
reduces downstream signaling pathways

Abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Fatigue
Skin rash



BREAST CANCER TREATMENT

Patients with estrogen receptor–positive DCIS and residual breast tissue should receive five years of endocrine
therapy. This treatment includes tamoxifen if the patient is
premenopausal and tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor if
postmenopausal.
Lobular carcinoma in situ was previously considered
a malignancy. However, despite its name, it is not a carcinoma and is a proliferative disease that confers an increased
risk of future breast cancer. It is no longer included in breast
cancer staging guidelines.

disease. Chemotherapeutic drugs are the only systemic
therapy available for patients with triple-negative breast
cancer.
Preoperative therapy with trastuzumab (Herceptin)
and/or pertuzumab (Perjeta), which are monoclonal antibodies directed against ERBB2, is used in addition to chemotherapy when the cancer is ERBB2 positive.
Patients with low-risk estrogen receptor–positive disease,
or older adults, may be eligible for preoperative systemic
therapy alone, without proceeding to surgery.
A complete response (i.e., the tumor is no longer detectable) to preoperative systemic therapies is associated with
favorable outcomes for disease-free survival and overall
survival.24 The degree of tumor response to preoperative systemic therapies helps determine the need for and response
to any postoperative systemic therapies.

Stages I-III, Early Invasive and Locally
Advanced, Nonmetastatic Breast Cancer
Nonmetastatic breast cancer is treated with preoperative
and postoperative systemic therapies that include chemotherapy, endocrine therapies, immunotherapy with monoclonal antibodies directed at tumor receptors, and surgery
SURGICAL INTERVENTIONS
and radiation.
Molecular testing helps guide whether chemotherapy Lumpectomy with radiation should be offered if negative
needs to be added to a treatment regimen. For patients margins can be achieved with acceptable cosmesis. When
with hormone receptor–positive,
node-negative breast cancer, including males, a 21-gene expression assay
TABLE 2
(Oncotype DX) is the preferred assay
for disease prognostication and deciBreast Cancer Treatments
sions about the addition of chemoBreast cantherapy.24 When chemotherapy and
cer stage
Classification
Surgery
Radiation
endocrine therapy are administered

In situ
Lumpectomy or mastectomy
Yes, if lumpectomy
postoperatively, chemotherapy always
with sentinel lymph node biopsy
precedes endocrine therapy.
PREOPERATIVE SYSTEMIC THERAPY

The purpose of preoperative systemic therapy is to decrease the size
of resectable breast tumors (allowing
for better cosmetic and treatment outcomes), to render unresectable tumors
operable, and to allow for SLN biopsy
instead of axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) if axillary nodes are no
longer detectable. Generally, preoperative therapy is not recommended for
early invasive breast cancers (I, IIa,
IIb) because tumors are often small
enough to undergo resection with
lumpectomy.
Preoperative
chemotherapy
is
used for patients with large primary
tumors in relation to breast size who
want breast-conserving surgery. It is
also used for patients with inoperable
174 American Family Physician

I and II

Early invasive

Commonly lumpectomy plus
sentinel lymph node biopsy;
mastectomy may be needed
for larger tumors or because of
patient choice

Yes, if lumpectomy
or high-risk, nodepositive disease with
mastectomy

III

Locally
advanced

Commonly mastectomy plus
axillary lymph node dissection

Yes, if lumpectomy
or high-risk, nodepositive disease with
mastectomy

IV

Metastatic

Mastectomy or lumpectomy
may be appropriate when tumor
burden impacts quality of life

Radiation may be
appropriate when
tumor burden
impacts quality of life



BREAST CANCER TREATMENT

the excised tissue is sent to pathology, the specimen’s outer
surface is marked with ink. A specimen devoid of cancer
cells adjacent to the inked surface is considered a negative
margin.
Some tumors may be too large to allow for good cosmesis with lumpectomy and will require a mastectomy. Some
women may choose mastectomy over lumpectomy for many
other reasons, including family history, gene mutations,
peace of mind, or lack of access to health care centers offering radiation therapy.
In addition to removing the tumor, surgical interventions can also address the potential spread of breast cancer
through the lymphatic system. SLN biopsy is done by injecting tracer into the breast and removing the first several axillary nodes into which the tracer drains. An SLN biopsy is
preferred over ALND for patients without clinical evidence
of nodal disease or with a low nodal burden based on imaging studies.
The removal of more lymph nodes and adipose tissue
of the axilla by ALND is reserved for patients who have

positive nodes on SLN biopsy and will have a mastectomy,
patients with inflammatory breast cancer (a rare but aggressive cancer that causes redness and swelling of the breast),
and patients with positive nodes after preoperative chemotherapy. SLN biopsy does not confer an increased risk of
death compared with ALND.
POSTOPERATIVE THERAPY

Radiation. Radiation therapy is used after surgical excision
of breast cancer to eliminate any remaining subclinical disease. It is generally recommended for patients who have had
a lumpectomy and for patients with high-risk, node-positive
disease who have been treated with mastectomy. For
patients who have a lumpectomy, radiation decreases the
20-year, ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence rate.32
Partial breast irradiation, which involves treating only
the site of lumpectomy and surrounding tissue, requires
fewer radiation sessions and decreases acute skin toxicity
without increasing the risk of local recurrence.33,34 There is
evidence to suggest that whole breast radiation therapy may
result in better long-term cosmetic
results than partial breast irradiation.
Shared clinical decision-making for
radiation should consider patient life
expectancy, tumor response to preoperative systemic therapies, and nodal
involvement.
Endocrine therapy
Immunotherapy
Chemotherapy
Endocrine. Approximately twoEstrogen receptor and ductal carNot commonly
Not commonly offered
thirds of breast cancers are hormone
cinoma in situ should receive five
offered
receptor–positive (express estrogen
years of endocrine therapy:​
receptors, progesterone receptors, or
Tamoxifen if premenopausal
both) and are amenable to treatment
Tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor if
with endocrine therapies such as
postmenopausal
tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors.36
Hormone receptor–positive breast
ERBB2-positive breast
May be appropriThe mechanism of action and adverse
cancer should be treated with up to
cancer should receive
ate for hormone
effects for these therapies are summa10 years of endocrine therapy
one year of trastureceptor–positive,
rized
zumab
(Herceptin)
ERBB2-positive,
and
If premenopausal:​
triple-negative breast
Women
who
are
premenoCertain high-risk
Five years tamoxifen
cancer of any stage;​
cancers may benefit
pausal at the time of their hormone
Additional three to five years
molecular testing
from the addition of
receptor–positive breast cancer diagtamoxifen if still premenopausal
helps guide addition of
pertuzumab (Perjeta)
nosis should receive five years of
chemotherapy
to
the
Additional five years tamoxifen
or neratinib (Nerlynx)
treatment regimen
therapy with gonadotropin-releasing
or aromatase inhibitor if now
postmenopausal
hormone (GnRH) for ovarian suppresIf postmenopausal:​up to 10 years of
sion plus tamoxifen or an aromatase
tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor
inhibitor.24 Ovarian suppression prevents the ovaries from releasing estroEndocrine therapy, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy may be offered to target their
appropriate breast cancer subtypes with the goal of managing symptoms, extending life,
gen, which can lead to accelerated
and preserving quality of life
growth for hormone receptor–positive
breast cancer. Patients who may benefit
more from the GnRH plus aromatase
inhibitor regimens are those with




BREAST CANCER TREATMENT

hormone receptor–positive, ERBB2-negative breast cancer
with a high risk of recurrence. After five years of tamoxifen therapy, patients who are premenopausal and originally received tamoxifen receive an additional five years of
tamoxifen, and patients who originally received tamoxifen
and are now postmenopausal may receive tamoxifen or an
aromatase inhibitor for an additional five years. Premenopausal patients who were originally treated with aromatase
inhibitors may receive an additional three to five years of
aromatase inhibitor therapy.
Women who are postmenopausal at the time of their
breast cancer diagnosis may receive up to 10 years total of
endocrine therapy. This may consist of tamoxifen alone, an
aromatase inhibitor alone, or a sequence of the two medications. GnRH is not necessary after menopause.
Targeted. Approximately 15% to 20% of breast cancers
involve overexpression of ERBB2. These cancers have a
poor prognosis;​however, outcomes are improved with chemotherapy in conjunction with trastuzumab administered
every three weeks for one year. There is no increase in
long-term, disease-free survival with more than one year of
therapy.
Patients with high-risk ERBB2-positive breast cancer
determined by larger tumor size and positive nodal status
may benefit from additional agents such as pertuzumab,
and neratinib (Nerlynx), an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor
that acts on ERBB2-expressing cells. Treatment with therapies in addition to a trastuzumab-containing regimen has
demonstrated a small increase in three-year disease-free
survival and five-year disease-free survival for pertuzumab
and neratinib, respectively.
Chemotherapy. Chemotherapy is used to decrease tumor
size before surgery, and is administered after surgery to
treat breast cancers that express hormone receptors and
ERBB2. Chemotherapy is a core treatment for triple-negative
breast cancer because endocrine therapy and immunotherapy have no benefit. Taxane-based, nonanthracycline
regimens are used for lower-risk disease, and anthracyclines
are included in regimens that target triple-negative cancers
with lymph node involvement.41 There are data supporting
the use of capecitabine (Xeloda) for triple-negative cancers
with lymph node involvement if residual disease is present
at the time of surgery.
Other Treatments. Postmenopausal women who receive
postoperative aromatase inhibitor therapy for nonmetastatic breast cancer should be offered bisphosphonate therapy, which appears to decrease the chance of developing
bone metastases and fractures and improves survival.
Before starting bisphosphonate therapy, patients should
undergo a dental examination and should be taking vitamin D and calcium supplements.


Stage IV, Metastatic Breast Cancer
The median survival rate for patients with metastatic
breast cancer has improved over the past several decades
with advances in breast cancer therapies. Although metastatic breast cancer is rarely cured, survival is now 24 to 40
months.
The goals of treatment focus on minimizing symptoms,
extending life, and preserving quality of life. Endocrine
therapy, chemotherapy, and immunotherapy may all be
offered to target their respective appropriate breast cancer
subtypes. Surgery or radiation following systemic therapy
may be appropriate for patients in which tumor burden
affects quality of life.
The 60% to 80% of patients with advanced breast cancer who develop metastases to the bones should be offered
treatment with denosumab (Prolia) or bisphosphonates
such as zoledronic acid (Reclast) or pamidronate (Aredia). These therapies have been shown to decrease the
effects of metastases on the bone, such as fractures and
hypercalcemia.
Metastases to the liver, lung, and brain are common in
stage IV breast cancer. Symptomatic treatments should
be recommended as needed to provide palliation.
Recurrent Breast Cancer
The treatment of recurrent breast cancer requires a multidisciplinary approach that considers all potential options
for optimal outcomes. For locally recurrent breast cancer initially treated with breast-conserving therapy (i.e.,
lumpectomy plus radiation), additional radiation is not
recommended;​total mastectomy is the standard of care.
However, a 2017 study demonstrated promising data that
local resection followed by partial breast reirradiation could
be an appropriate alternative treatment approach.
Local recurrence following a mastectomy usually involves
the chest wall and requires wide local excision. If the patient
did not previously receive radiation, surgical resection followed by radiation therapy is recommended.51
For regional recurrence involving the axillary lymph
nodes, surgical resection and radiation therapy are recommended. Radiation therapy without surgery is the standard of care for supraclavicular or internal mammary node
recurrence.
The treatment of recurrent disease with distant metastases (i.e., stage IV) is guided by estrogen, progesterone, and ERBB2 receptor status. Treatment algorithms
include additional endocrine therapy, chemotherapy,
and ERBB2-targeted therapies. Regular assessments with
shared decision-making should be implemented to assess
ongoing treatment in the setting of palliative and supportive care.