Is Breast Cancer a Curable Disease?
A Study of 14,731 Women With Breast Cancer From the
Cancer Registry of Norway
LARS ERIK RUTQVIST, MD,'

ARNE WALLGREN, MD,t AND

BO NILSSON, BSCS

The question whether breast cancer is curable remains controversial. Late recurrences and death from
the disease are not infrequent. Long term follow-up of a large patient population is necessary to study
this issue. The authors report a study of 14,731 cases of breast cancer reported to the Cancer Registry
of Norway with follow-up times ranging from 5 to 18 years. A model in which the logarithms of the
survival times were assumed to be normally distributed, the lognormal model, fitted the data well for
individual stages, age groups, and periods of treatment. The cured fraction, i.e., consisting of those only
subject to normal morrality risks, was estimated from the model to 35 1% standard error. In Stages
1. 2, 3, and 4 it was 54 3%, 27 f I%, 19 -t 270, and 2 ? 1%, respectively. It is concluded, however,
that the estimated cure rate in Stages 3 and 4 should be regarded with caution in view of the methodological
problems involved in the analysis and the small number of patients with long follow-up. The estimated
cured fraction in both the individual stages and in the entire material was significantly higher in patients
younger than 55 years of age than in older patients. The median survival of noncured patients was
estimated to be 3.6 years for the entire material. In Stage 1, 2, 3, and 4 it was 7.6 years, 3.4 years, 2.1
years, and 0.7 years, respectively. The lognormal model seems to be a good approximation of breast
cancer survival. The model is consistent both with late excess mortality and with the presence of a cured
fraction. It is noteworthy that an excess mortality was observed during the whole follow-up period.
Extrapolations from the model should therefore be cautiously judged until supported by observed data.
Cancer 53:1793-1800, 1984.

*

*

I

FTHE REMAINING SURVIVORS some time after treatment

for a life-threatening disease have a death rate from
all causes similar to that of a normal population with the
same age and sex distribution, they may be considered
cured.'.' The proportion of such cases can then be calculated with nonparametric methods3 In malignant diseases, e.g., in carcinoma of the cervix,' a cured fraction
of this type has been suggested. In breast cancer, however,
patients die at a rate that exceeds that of a normal popFrom Radiumhemmet and the Oncologic Centre, Karolinska Hospital,
S- 104 0 I Stockholm. Sweden.
Research Fellow, Radiumhemmet, Karolinska Hospital.
t Associate Professor of Oncology, Radiumhemmet and Oncologic
Centre, Karolinska Hospital.
$ Research Fellow, Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Karolinska
Institute.
Address for reprints: A. Wallgren, MD. Radiumhemmet, Karolinska
Hospital, S-104 0 1 Stockholm, Sweden.
The authors thank the Cancer Registry of Norway for providing them
with the patient data on which this study is based. They also thank Dr.
Knut Magnus, the Cancer Registry of Norway. and Dr. Tim0 Hakulinen.
the Cancer Registry of IFinland. for valuable discussions that have improved this article.
Accepted for publicaiion January 25, 1983.

ulation even after prolonged periods of follow-up.'- '" The
disease can recur and kill its host even several decades
after the initial treatment. The proportion of cured patients, if any, can then only be estimated if it can be
shown that the survival of the patients closely follows a
defined mathematical survival model, which supposedly
is applicable also outside the observed range of followup. By extrapolation, the survival model could then be
used to predict the outcome after longer follow-up than
is available.
Many different models for breast cancer survival have
been proposed.'.'.'2.'5-'3 In this context it must be realized
that it is impossible to prove that a survival model is true.
It can be rejected, however, if it leads to a statistically
significant departure from observed survival data. Estimates based on large sets of patients are therefore more
reliable than if based on small samples. We have studied
the survival and the fit of different survival models in all
14,73I cases of female breast cancer reported to the Cancer
Registry of Norway during 1953 through 1967. Complete
follow-up data were available up to 1972.
The primary aim of the study was to assess if any of

1793

TABLEI .

Female Patients With Breast Cancer in N o w a y From
I953 Through 1967 by Age Group and Stage
Age of patients (yr)

Stage

Total
no. of
patients

4 5

45-54

55-14

>75

I
2
3
4
Unknown

6745
5252
985
I370
379

1059
913
77
I21
46

1637
1493
150
259
54

2969
235 I
467
67 I
I50

I080
49 5
29 1
319
I29

Total

14.731

2216

3593

6608

2314

the suggested models was consistent with both the late
excess mortality and the presence of a cured fraction. We
also wanted to assess if any such model could be used to
predict long-term survival from data for a limited period
of follow-up.

Material and Methods
We obtained data on all 14,73 1 cases of female breast
cancer reported to the Cancer Registry of Norway during
1953 through 1967. The registry covers the entire population of Norway. Thus, life tables for the general Norwegian female population should give a reliable estimate
of the expected survival of this group. We chose this
material because it consisted of a large patient population
in which the cases were grouped according to stage and
because the follow-up was at least 5 years. The longest
follow-up was 18 years. The material has previously been
presented in “Survival of Cancer Patients: Cases Diagnosed in Norway 1953-1 967.”24
The material was divided by period of treatment, age,
and stage of disease. During 1953 to 1957, 1958 to 1962,
and 1963 to 1967 the number of cases reported to the
registry was 4246, 4872, and 56 13, respectively. The patients were divided into four age groups: <45 years, 45
to 54 years, 55 to 74 years, and 3 7 5 years.
The basis for the stage grouping was the information
supplied in the forms sent to the registry. Stage I is a
localized tumor without axillary lymph node metastases.
Stage 2 is a localized tumor with axillary lymph node
metastases. Stage 3 is a locally advanced cancer with or
without axillary or supraclavicular lymph node metastases. Stage 4 signifies cases with distant metastases. The
stage grouping is possibly not as accurate in this material
as in material from a single institution. The workup was
probably different in different hospitals, possibly less accurate in old or debilitated patients, and may have
changed with time.
Table I gives the number of cases by age and by stage.
For each of the 20 groups in the table, the material was
subdivided by the three treatment periods: 1053 to 1957,
1958 to 1962, and 1963 to 1968. For each of these

1984

VOl. 53

subgroups, we obtained the total number of cases and
for each year of follow-up (i): the numbers dead (O,),
withdrawn alive (WJ, expected survival at the end ofeach
interval (PI).
For the analysis it was necessary to estimate the number
of deaths attributable to breast cancer in each interval,
i.e.,excess deaths. Breast cancer deaths were assumed to
occur independently. The number of excess deaths for
the interval i was calculated as the difference between the
observed number of deaths during this interval (0,)
and
the expected number (E,). El was calculated as the product
of the number of patients exposed to the risk of dying
during the interval (N:)
and the midpoint estimate of the
hazard rate (instantaneous death rate) from normal causes
of deaths (61,).
N: = N, - 0 , / 2 - W,/2
N,: the number of patients entering the interval
fil = G1/(1 - T11/2)
GI: the conditional probability of dying from normal
causes during the interval
6,= 1 - P,/P,-,

In the tables for the total material, which we obtained
from the Cancer Registry of Norway, the expected survival
was calculated for an age-matched general p ~ p u l a t i o n . ~ ~
Due to differences in mortality or withdrawal pattern in
different age groups this may lead to an overestimation
or underestimation of the excess mortality which increases
with longer f o l l o w - ~ p To
. ~ ~compensate
~~~
for this, the
excess mortality for each stage, for each treatment period,
and for the total material was calculated by summing the
expected numbers of deaths for each year of follow-up
in each age-group.

The Siirvival Models
The “nonpuramelric model o/ Cutler and Axte1I3.”:
This model is based on observations of the conditional
interval relative survival rate, r, = p,/fi,, where p, is the
conditional probability of surviving to the end of the
interval i: p, = 1 - O,/(N, - W,/2), and 5, is the conditional
probability of escaping the normal mortality risk during
the interval: 6, = P,/P,., . If r, stabilizes at 1 .O some time
after treatment, the remaining proportion is only subject
to the normal mortality risk and may thus be considered
cured. The calculation of the cured fraction and its standard error is given by Cutler and AxtelL3
If r, stabilizes at I .O, the cumulative relative survival,
the ratio between the cumulative observed and expected
survival, stabilizes at a value that corresponds to the cured
fraction. If, on the other hand, r, stabilizes at a value LY
less than 1.0, the remaining proportion is subject to a
higher than normal mortality risk and no cured fraction
is observed. The general form for this survival model is
“

10970142, 1984, 8, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19840415)53:8<1793::AID-CNCR2820530832>3.0.CO;2-Y by MEF Universitesi, Wiley Online Library on [22/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

CANCERApril 15

1794

BREASTCANCER

A CURABLE

DISEASE?*

Rurqvist et a/.

1795

TABLF
2. The Survival Models Tested on 14,731 Cases of Female Breast Cancer Reported to the Cancer Registry of Norway

_-

Formulation of survival

Model
Nonparametric-’
Parametric models with two parameters
Exponential’
Extrapolated a’ztuarial’’.‘‘I
Parametric models with three parameters
Sum of two exponential*’
Exponential with shoulder’”
Weibul12’
Lognormal”

P,

=

nP,(c‘ + (I - c’)P,)

P,
P,

=
=

P,(c + ( 1
c) exp(-kt))
P, exp(1n c(I - exp(-kt)))

P,
P,
P,

=
=
=

Pic’ exp(-k,t) + ( I - c‘) exp(-k2t))
P,(c + (I - c)( 1 - (I - exp(-kt))”))
P,(c + ( I - c) exp(-kt)”)

P,

=

P,(c + ( I

-

-

c)

I’

(exp ( - ‘ h x 2 ) / 6 . d x ) ; u

=

(log t

-

m)/s

f,:probahility lo survive to end of interval i; p,:probability to escape
normal mortality risk to end of interval i: p,: probability to escape
specific (excess) mortality risk to end of interval i; c: cured fraction: c’:

noncured fraction with specific mortality risk; a:constant < 1.0: k. k , .
k2. n: constants: m: mean of lognormal survival time distribution; s:

given in Table 2 . In this case the parameter a has to be
estimated, and the model is not truly nonparametric.
PurumPtric szirvivul’models: In the literature, the interest
in parametric-survival-time models has focused on relatively simple mathematic functions in which the parameters are clinically meaningful, e.g., parameters describing
the mortality of patients not cured from the disease, and
the fraction of patients only subject to normal or nearly
normal mortality risks. We have tested the most commonly proposed mathematical models for cancer survival,
and they are summarized in Table 2.
The simplest mlodel is the exponential survival
model,^.^^.^^ which assumes that the risk to die for uncured
patients is constant over time. The cured fraction, which
is subject only to normal mortality risks, will become
relatively more important with time as the doomed fraction is depleted. Thus, in the total population, the risk
to die from cancer decreases during follow-up and the
relative survival approaches asymptotically the cured
fraction. Haybittle’“ noted, however, that this model
tended to underestimate the late mortality and to overestimate the cured fraction. In his “extrapolated actuarial”
model, the logarithm of the hazard rate decreases linearily
with time, which gave a better approximation of late
mortality.’”’” In both these models, two parameters have
to be determined. A persisting excess mortality is also
explained if the cancer population is assumed to consist
of two distinct populations, each following an exponential
model, one with a high. the other with a low niortality,12.2’
“sum of two exponential” model. This model has three
parameters, but no cured fraction.
In the mentioned models, the mortality is assumed to
be highest imniediately after diagnosis. In most malignant
diseases, however, the mortality is initially low, increases
to a maximum, and decreases thereafter.17 The addition
of a “shape parameter” to the exponential model gives
the “exponential m’odelwith a shoulder”lx and the Weibull model’ in which the initial part ofthe survival curve

is modified. With the lognormal model, however, a survival curve is obtained that is consistent both with a low
initial mortality which rapidly increases to a maximum.
and with a slow decrease in the mortality after the maximum has occurred.” In this model the logarithms of
the survival times are assumed to be normally distributed.

standard deviation of lognormal survival time distribution.

Agreement or Disagreement Bet ween Observed Survival
und the Models
A minimum chi-squared test was used to assess if any
set of parameters was consistent with a nonsignificant
departure of the theoretical number of deaths according
to a model, from the observed number of deaths from
all causes. This method is similar to the method described
by Mould and B ~ a g . ~ ~The
. * ’theoretical and the observed
numbers were generally compared for yearly intervals.
To avoid less than 10 to 20 expected deaths per interval,
2-to-4-year intervals were used in Stage 3 and 4 patients
after the seventh year. In the minimum chi-squared test
the parameters were changed stepwise until the minimum
chi-squared value was reached. The degrees of freedom
were (n - k - I), where n was the number of intervals
and k the number of estimated parameters of the model.
If the minimum chi-squared value indicated a significant
( P > 0.05) lack of fit, the model was rejected. If it was
not rejected, a runs test was performed and a DurbinWatson statistic calculated in order to detect correlated
errors.” If such errors were found. the model was also
rejected.
t.,’~tit nut ion o/‘Puru I niv Pr.)

For the lognormal model, which turned out to give
the best fit to the observed data, the parameter values
and their standard errors were estimated by the maximum
likelihood met hod. l 7
The fit of the lognormal model to the survival of the
study population was illustrated by a comparison ofcon-

10970142, 1984, 8, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19840415)53:8<1793::AID-CNCR2820530832>3.0.CO;2-Y by MEF Universitesi, Wiley Online Library on [22/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

IS

No. 8

CANCERApril 15 1984

VOl.

53

Results

Conditional annual
relative surv ratel%)

The Nonpururnetric Model of' Curler and Axtel13

95-

90..

ji
1

-

\

0

5

10

15 y e a r s

FIG. I . Conditional annual relative survival rates of 14,73 I cases of
breast cancer during I8 years of follow-up. The theoretical rates assuming
a lognormal-survival time distribution are indicated by the broken line.

ditional interval relative survival rates which were calculated for each year of follow-up. The estimated parameter values of the model were used to compute the theoretical cumulative relative survival at yearly intervals.
The theoretical conditional annual relative survival during
year t was then obtained as the ratio between the cumulative survival rate at the end of t and at (t - 1).
Conditional onnual
relative surv rate (%I
A

-

90.

H

5

10

The Parametric Models
Table 3 summarizes the results from the minimum
chi-squared tests, the runs tests, and the Durbin-Watson
statistics. In this table,
indicates that a model could
not be rejected. Only the lognormal model consistently
fitted the data for individual stages and for all stages in
combination. In Stage 3, several models could not be
rejected. In Stage I the exponential model with an initial
shoulder was also not rejected. The lognormal model was
the only model not rejected in any of the different age
groups or any of the three treatment periods (data not
shown).

+

Parumeters oj [he Lognormu1 Model

stage 1 (67451
s t a g e 2 (5252)

85

0

Figure 1 shows the conditional annual relative survival
rates of all patients. In Figures 2 and 3, the material is
subdivided by stage. For the total material, the annual
rates increased but did not exceed 100%during 18 years
of follow-up. No convincing stabilization around a value
less than 100 was observed. In Stages 1 and 2, the annual
rates seemed to stabilize around 98%, and no cured fraction was thus observed (Fig. 2). Applying the nonparametric model (Table 2), and assuming that the annual
rates asymptotically approached the mean of the last 4
observed years, the fractions with a nearly normal survival
was estimated to 76% for Stage I , and 3370 for patients
with Stage 2 tumors. In Stages 3 and 4, the conditional
relative survival exceeded 100%in the 13th year of followup (Fig. 3). This could indicate that some patients with
these stages really were cured. In Stage 3 patients, the
cured fraction was calculated to 23 ? 2'70, and in Stage
4 to 3 ? 1%. The number of patients remaining at risk
at the beginning of the 13th year. however, was only 34
and I2 in the two stages, respectively. Curability in these
stages based on this model should therefore be regarded
with caution.

15 years-

Fici. 2. Conditional annual relative survival rates for Stage 1 and 2
breast cancer cases during 18 years of follow-up. The theoretical rates
assuming a iognormal-survival time distribution are indicated by the
broken lines. The figures within brackets denote the number of patients.

Since only the lognormal model gave a consistently
good fit to the observed data, estimates of the parameters
and their standard errors are only given for this model.
The parameters are ( I ) the mean of the logarithms of the
survival times of those who die from the disease (The
antilogarithm of this mean is an estimate of the median
survival time. Logarithms with a base of 10 were used.);
(2) the standard deviation of the survival times; and (3)
the cured fraction, i.e., those who have a survival equivalent to that of an age-matched general population. Table
4 shows the estimates of these parameters and their standard errors for the three treatment periods and for the
entire material. The parameters were estimated for all

10970142, 1984, 8, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19840415)53:8<1793::AID-CNCR2820530832>3.0.CO;2-Y by MEF Universitesi, Wiley Online Library on [22/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

1796

CURABLE

Conditional a n n u a l
relative surv rate ( % I

DISEASE?* Riitqvisr el a/.

1797

TABLE3. Results From the Tests of Fit Between the Theoretical
Distributions and the Observed Distribution of Deaths
Stage
Model

5

2

3

4

0
0

0
0

0
0

+
0

0
0

0
0
0

0
+
0

0
0
0

0
+
+

0
0
0

10

+

+

+

+

+

These results are from 14.731 cases of breast cancer reported to the
Cancer Registry of Norway.
0: model was rejected because of lack of 61: +: it was not rejected.

stage 4 (1370)

L

15 years

FIG. 3 . Conditional annual relative survival rates for Stage 3 and 4
breast cancer cases during I8 years of follow-up. The theoretical rates
assuming a lognormal-survival time distribution are indicated by the
broken lines. The figures within brackets denote the number of patients.

groups with data for the first 10 years and for groups with
longer follow-up, also with data for the longest observation
period. The estimated mean of the lognormal distribution
of survival times wa!j 0.56 ? 0.01 log years for the total
material. This corresponds to a median survival of 3.6
years. The standard deviation was 0.60 k 0.0 I log years.
The cured fraction was estimated to 35 L 2%. No significant differences were found if the parameters were
estimated with data only for the first 10 years or if data
for the longest follow-up were used. There were no significant differences hetween the means or their standard
deviations estimated for the three treatment periods. The
cured proportion. however. rose from 33 f 1% in 1953
to 1957 to 30 3% in 1963 to 1967 ( P = 0.05).
Table 5 shows the estimated parameter values for the
different stages. Within each stage the values are given
for patients younger and older than 55 years of age. The
mean of the lognormal distribution of survival times decreased from 0.88 2: 0.05 log years (7.6 years) in Stage
I to -0.14 +: 0.02 (0.7 years) for Stage 4 patients, and
the estimated cured fraction decreased from 54 2 3'70 to
2 5 1%. Thcre were no significant differences between
the estimates of the cured fraction for Stage 3 or Stage
4 patients whether these were calculated according to the
nonparameti-ic model or according to the lognormal
model. In the total material. there was no significant dif-

*

I

Two parameter models
Exponential
Extrapolated actuarial
Three parameter models
Sum of two exponential
Exponential with shoulder
Weibull
Lognormal

4I
.
0

Total

ferences between the means of the log-survival time distributions of patients younger or older than 55 years of
age. Except in Stage 4, there were also no significant
differences between the means for the two age groups in
the individual stages. In Stage 4, the mean was -0.02
f 0.04 log years (1.0 years) for those younger than 5 5
years of age, and -0.14 k 0.02 (0.7 years. P = 0.001) for
those who were older. The standard deviation of the lognormal-survival time distribution was significantly lower
for patients younger than 5 5 years of age (0.53 k 0.02)
than for older patients (0.66 f 0.02, P < 0.0001). In the
individual stages, however, there were no significant differences between the age groups in this respect. The estimated cured fraction was significantly higher for patients
younger than 55 years of age (44 -+ 1%) than for older
patients (26 & 2%, P < 0.0001). Significant differences
between the two age groups in the same direction were
also found within each stage with the exception of Stage
4 where no significant cure was found in any age group.



Estimated with the maximum likelihood method for 14.731 case, of
hreast cancer reported to the Cancer Registry of Noway. The parameters
were estimated for three treatment periods and for the total material.
The values were determined with data for the first 10 years of followup in all groups. In groups with longer observation period. the values
were also estimated with data for maximum length of follow-up.





Estimated with the maximum likelihood method for breast cancer
cases from the Cancer Registry of Norway divided by stage and by age.

Comparison of Conditional Annual Relative
Survival Rates
Using the estimated parameter values , theoretical conditional relative survival rates were calculated for each year of follow-up. Figure l shows these
rates for the total population together with the rates calculated from the observed survival. They show a good
similarity even though the differences increase with time.
The departures were not significant, but it is noteworthy
that in 7 of the 8 last years of follow-up, the rates calculated
from the observed survival were higher than the theoretical
rates. This could indicate a systematic departure from
the model. Figures 2 and 3 show the results for the different
tumor stages. The theoretical rates were similar to the
rates obtained from the observed survival in all stages.
For Stage 1 and 2 patients (Fig. 2), the mean theoretical
rate for the period 14 to 18 years was 98.9% and 98.2%.
respectively. The corresponding rates calcu la ted from the
observed survival was 98.4% and 98.20/0, respectively.
Discussion
The current study shows that there is an excess mortality
from breast cancer at least during the first 18 years after
treatment. This result accords with many other
studies.'-13 In Stages 3 and 4, however, there was no
excess mortality after the 13th year of follow-up.
A cured fraction could then be estimated according to
Cutler and Axtell.' It was 23 +- 2%) in Stage 3 , and 3

Vol. 5 3

2 1% in Stage 4. Only very few patients, however, with
these stages remained at risk during the 13th year. In
view of this and the methodological problems involved
in calculating the excess mortality, vide iqja. curability
in these stages should be regarded with caution. In Stages
1 and 2, the annual survival ratios seemed to stabilize
around a value less than 10076, and no cured fraction
was observed. This could mean that after a rapidly
dying subgroup is depleted, the remaining patients are
still dying at a rate that exceeds that of a normal population. This had led to the formulation of the hypothesis
that breast cancer consists of two distinct populations,
one with a yearly excess mortality of 25% to 70%, the
other with an excess mortality of 2.5% to 9%.3,12,21.2s
Even
though the annual survival ratios of patients with Stage
1 and 2 tumors seemed to converge towards a constant
value lower than loo%, the parametric model consisting
of the sum of two different exponential functions did not fit the data for the entire material or for the
individual stages.
Several mathematical models have been suggested in
the literature for breast cancer survival. The simple exponential model with a cured fraction' and the extrapolated actuarial r n ~ d e l , ' which
" were rejected in the
current study, could have been rejected a priori because
both of these models assume that the conditional relative
survival is lowest immediately after treatment, which
clearly is not the case except in Stage 4. In
Stages 1 and 2, the annual relative survival rates were
even higher during the first year than during the second.
This shape of the curve is not consistent with the simple
exponential function. The exponential model with an
initial shoulder, a survival function seen when cells are
irradiated with single fractions of various doses of x-rays,
was suggested to overcome this problem.'* Likewise, in
the Weibull distribution an increasing hazard rate can be
achieved if the "shape" parameter is greater than unity.
Neither of these models nor the exponential functions
are consistent with the decreased mortality during followup. The extrapolated actuarial model, however, was designed for this reason. All of these models have been
accepted in other groups of breast cancer patients, but
were rejected in this study, probably because of the much
larger size of our study population. Only the lognormal
survival model was not rejected when applied to the entire
material. individual stages, age groups, and periods of
treatment. Boag showed that the distribution
of survival times for several malignant diseases were skew
with a marked tail and that their logarithms were approximately normally distributed. " He also suggested that
the parameters could be estimated with the maximum
likelihood method. Using a graphical solution, Berg came
to the same
The lognormal survival time dis-


tribution is consistent with late excess mortality ,
and at the same time with a fraction of patients only
subject to normal moilality risks.
It is possible that significant departures from observed
values would have been found also with the lognormal
model if the size of our material had been even larger.
It is important to rernember that it is not possible to
prove that a survival model is true, only to reject it if
there is a statistically significant departure of values predicted by the model from the observed values. Even if
breast cancer survival times exactly follow the model,
there are several reasons why departures could be observed. The patients are, for instance, not only subject
to an increased mortality risk because of the disease, but
also to the hazards oftreatment, c . , ~postoperative
.,
deaths,
late second cancer due to radiotherapy,’ and in the future,
due to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Treatment of distant disease could delay death in some cases and possibly hasten
it in others.>”
The material came from a registry with a high frequency
of reports on detected cancer cases. Even if there is reason
to believe that the ttxpected survival derived from life
tables for the general female population should be a reasonable estimate of the “breast cancer-free” survival of
the study population. it is of course possible that breast
cancer patients are subject to other mortality risks than
the general population, even besides the increased risk
from breast cancer. ‘The most easily recognized example
of this is the association between breast cancer and other
primary malignancies, e.,q.. endometrial cancer, ovarian
cancer, and cancer of the colon. This could be an explanation of why the annual survival ratios in Stages 1 and
2 seemed to converge towards less than 100%.
When judging the results from this study, it must be
realized that the mathematic treatment of the material
is based on several simplifications and approximations.
For instance, the maiterial was grouped in yearly intervals,
and death was assumed to have occurred at the midpoint
of each interval. The calculation of the excess number
of deaths was also approximate. Because of the age variation in cancer survival, with a poorer outcome for older
patients,15 the number of older women in the material
decreased during follow-up niore than expected for a general population. The expected survival for later yearly
intervals was therefbre probably underestimated since the
remaining cases were younger than anticipated. Allowance
was made partly for this by partitioning the patient population into four age groups and calculating the excess
number of deaths for each subgroup.’ Nevertheless, the
excess deaths were probably somewhat underestimated
because of this. The breast cancer deaths were also assumed to be unrehted to deaths from other causes, which
probably is not true. An interaction between widespread

cancer and other diseases may well exist. This could be
one reason for the shorter median survival in Stage 4
patients who were older than 5 5 years of age compared
to the younger patients. Furthermore, breast cancer is
not an infrequent cause of death in the general female
population amounting to 3% to 4% of the total mortality.
The life tables were not corrected for this. The expected
survival and thus the excess deaths were therefore somewhat underestimated. A slight underestimation of the excess deaths could explain why some cures were found in
Stage 4. Another explanation for this could be that the
clinical staging was not always accurate. On the other
hand, the study population was taken from a cancer registry in which cancers rather than individuals are registered. Some of the cases were therefore probably registered
because of their second breast cancer. Due to their first
cancer, their survival expectation should then be less than
expected from the life tables.
What other indications are there that an approximate
lognormal survival model could be applicable‘? Several
malignant diseases in which a cured fraction is observable
or where all patients have lethal disease are also consistent
with this model. These include chronic leukemia,3’ cancer
of the uterine
several types of head and neck
cancers,
and gastric
Berg proposed that
the lognormal distribution might be a limiting distribution
for many malignant diseases since it seemed to be approached as the number of patients in a group increased. l 6
In comparison to the mentioned disease, breast cancer
was characterized by a long median survival of patients
not cured, and a large standard deviation of the lognormal
distribution which is consistent with the late excess mortality. Boag’s explanation for the lognormal survival time
distribution was that the length ofthe remaining survival
time, if the patient was not cured by treatment, was dependent principally on the growth rate of tumor remnants.” Pearlman estimated the growth rates of breast
cancers which recurred in the scar, assuming that the
recurrence started from a single cell.33He found that the
growth rates were approximately lognormally distributed.
Likewise, von Fournier found that the growth rates of
breast cancers that could be followed in serial mammograms, were lognormally distributed.The
 tumors
included in such a study. however, are likely to be selected.
The fastest and the slowest growing tumors will be underrepresented because rapidly increasing tumors will appear as clinically apparent lesions between mammograms,
and tumors with low-growth rates may not increase
enough between the mammograms to be identified as
cancers.
One serious disadvantage with the lognormal model is
that a very large series of patients are necessary, or else
the standard errors of the estimated parameters will be
very large. If the standard deviation of the survival time
distribution can be assumed to be known, the errors of
the two remaining parameters will d e ~ r e a s e .In
' ~ the current material, the standard deviation did not vary significantly between the groups treated during different periods of time or when the parameters were determined
with knowledge of only the first 10 years of follow-up or
when all 18 years were used (Table 4). Therefore, the
standard deviation of 0.59 to 0.60 log years calculated
for this material could possibly be used in studies on
smaller series.
In patients with Stage 3 and 4 tumors, the estimates
of the cured fraction based on the lognormal model were
not significantly different from those calculated according
to Cutler and AxtelL3The good fit ofthe lognormal model
in Stages 1 and 2 is, of course, no proof that there exists
a proportion of patients with normal survival expectation
in these stages also. Extrapolations based on mathematical
models should be cautiously judged until supported by
observed data from series with longer follow-up. However,
since the mean age of breast cancer patients in an unselected series is approximately 60 years, a majority of
patients will die within 2 or 3 decades even of they are
cured from their cancer. A study of the behavior of breast
cancer after several decades is thus only possible in young
patients. Therefore, we are currently following a group
of young women with breast cancer in order to study the
long-term survival and a possible cured fraction.
