
Breast cancer risk factors


Abstract
Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed neoplastic disease in women around menopause often
leading to a significant reduction of these women’s ability to function normally in everyday life. The increased
breast cancer incidence observed in epidemiological studies in a group of women actively participating in social
and professional life implicates the necessity of conducting multidirectional studies in order to identify risk factors associated with the occurrence of this type of neoplasm. Taking the possibility of influencing the neoplastic
transformation process in individuals as a criterion, all the risk factors initiating the process can be divided into
two groups. The first group would include inherent factors such as age, sex, race, genetic makeup promoting
familial occurrence of the neoplastic disease or the occurrence of benign proliferative lesions of the mammary
gland. They all constitute independent parameters and do not undergo simple modification in the course of
an individual’s life. The second group would include extrinsic factors conditioned by lifestyle, diet or long-term
medical intervention such as using oral hormonal contraceptives or hormonal replacement therapy and their
influence on the neoplastic process may be modified to a certain degree. Identification of modifiable factors
may contribute to development of prevention strategies decreasing breast cancer incidence.

Introduction
Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed neoplastic disease in women around menopause often leading to a significant reduction of these women’s ability
to function normally in everyday life. According to 2010
epidemiological data for the Polish population published
on the National Cancer Registry web page, the number of new breast cancer cases was
15 784, which constituted about 22% of all diagnosed
cancers. The age distribution within the population of
breast cancer patients is also quite characteristic. Eighty
percent of these cancers are diagnosed in women aged
50 and more. Moreover, according to epidemiological
data, 50% of breast cancers occur in women aged from
50 to 69 years. What is especially worrying, within the
last two decades we have observed an over 2-fold increase in the occurrence of breast cancer in the Polish
population, which, unfortunately, has not been correlated with a significant improvement in treatment outcomes. As it was presented in the analysis by the National Cancer Registry, 5-year survival was observed in
75% of patients diagnosed in the years 2000-2002 and
in 77.2% of patients diagnosed in the years 2003-2005.
The increased breast cancer incidence observed in
epidemiological studies in a group of women actively

participating in social and professional life implicates
the necessity of conducting multidirectional studies in
order to identify risk factors associated with the occurrence of this type of neoplasm. Intensive studies conducted over the past several years showed that 20-30%
of newly diagnosed breast cancer cases may be associated with the occurrence of various risk factors actively
initiating or modifying the process of neoplastic transformation of breast cells. The most important ones are
age over 40, history of mammary gland diseases, history of cancer in first-degree relatives, early menarche
and late childbearing (after 35 years of age), woman’s
age at menopause and Caucasian race. Despite the
identification of many factors increasing the risk of
breast cancer occurrence, in 75-80% of women no risk
factor is found. The above-mentioned factors do not
exhaust the list of possible factors. They only illustrate
multidirectionality of the epidemiological, molecular
and clinical studies that have been conducted. Taking the possibility of influencing the neoplastic transformation process in individuals as a criterion, all the
risk factors initiating the process can be divided into
two groups. The first group would include inherent factors such as age, sex, race, genetic makeup promoting
familial occurrence of neoplastic disease or the occurrence of benign proliferative lesions of the mammary




gland. They all constitute independent parameters and
do not undergo simple modification in the course of
an individual’s life. The second group would include
extrinsic factors conditioned by lifestyle, diet or longterm medical intervention and their influence on the
neoplastic process may be modified to a certain degree.
However, it should be stressed that despite intensive
studies and examinations, it is difficult to unequivocally
explain the etiopathogenesis of the disease.

Intrinsic factors conditioning breast
cancer occurrence
The first basic factor in this group is the patient’s age
at the moment of diagnosis of neoplastic disease. As it
was mentioned above, breast cancer is most frequently
found in women around menopause. It is significantly
less frequently found in women below 45 years of age.
The analysis of morbidity coefficients for the Polish population has indicated a linear increase in the group of
women aged between 40 and 59 years, then it reaches
a plateau with a slight decreasing tendency in women
aged 70 and older. A very interesting correlation can be
observed between the age when neoplastic disease is
diagnosed and the expression of the estrogen receptor
found in the examined tumor tissue. Neoplasms showing estrogen receptor overexpression ER (+) are characterized by a frequency increasing with age as opposed
to ER (–) tumors, which occur more frequently up to
50 years of age and then reach a plateau. This phenomenon explains an increased percentage of ER (+) tumors
diagnosed in women after menopause.
Analyzing the structure of occurrence of breast cancer in relation to sex, we can firmly state that the neoplasm is diagnosed predominantly in women and only
sporadically in men in whom it constitutes less than
1% of all diagnosed breast cancers . Despite the incidental occurrence of this type of neoplasm in men, epidemiological data analysis has shown a clear increase
in the occurrence of breast cancer in men over the last
three decades. This phenomenon is difficult to explain, which is probably a result of the civilization progress ultimately leading to excessive obesity and longer
life expectancy in men. On the basis of literature
data it is hard to unequivocally describe the disease
course and prognosis in this group of patients, which,
as it seems, could be a result of a higher degree of advancement of the basic neoplastic process at the moment of diagnosis, coexistence of diseases associated
with old age or more aggressive course of the neoplastic
disease. Some other studies, however, did not reveal
increased mortality due to breast cancer in relation to
patients’ sex. This variation was initially explained
by differences in the molecular mechanism underlying
neoplastic transformation of mammary gland cells between women and men. However, numerous studies

conducted within the last two decades have not confirmed this hypothesis. What is more, due to significant
homology of the neoplastic processes in both sexes, it is
nowadays suggested that the same treatment methods
should be applied in women and men diagnosed with
breast cancer. Detailed histopathological analysis
of archive tissue material obtained from male patients
diagnosed with breast cancer showed a significantly,
over 80%, higher level of overexpression of estrogen
and progesterone receptors than the one observed in
material obtained from women with breast cancer. This
overexpression is very often strictly correlated with an
overexpression of bcl-2 protein. However, it is postulated that despite such a large percentage of ER (+)
tumors, their response to tamoxifen is weaker and the
receptor status is not associated with better prognosis. Another very interesting phenomenon is a small
percentage of tumors with HER-2 (human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2) super-expression in this group
and reported lack of the associated prognostic value
. Other risk factors leading to the occurrence of
breast cancer in both sexes include an increased estrogens level due to obesity, testicles hormonal function
impairment or Klinefelter syndrome.
Race is a very important intrinsic factor elevating
the risk of occurrence of breast cancer. As it was demonstrated in the study of Ban et al. [2], who analyzed
data included in SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results) database, the frequency of occurrence
of breast cancer in Caucasian women is about 127.4
in 100 000 individuals. The indicators of mortality and
5-year survival are 12.3% and 90.4%, respectively. In
the case of Blacks, the frequency of occurrence of the
neoplasm is about 121.4 in 100 000 individuals and the
indicators of mortality and 5-year survival are 18.2%
and 78.6%, respectively. The increased mortality due
to breast cancer as well as a lower number of women
surviving over 5 years from the moment of diagnosis is
a result of a higher level of progression of the disease
at the moment of initiating anti-neoplastic treatment
and a high percentage of tumors with no receptor expression (triple negative tumors). It is worthwhile
noticing that there is a much lower incidence of breast
cancer among Hispanics, however, in their case, the disease is diagnosed at a younger age and often shows
lack of expression of the estrogen or progesterone receptor as well as super-expression of HER2.
Another intrinsic factor conditioning the occurrence
of breast cancer is the familial susceptibility to this type
of neoplasm. Intensive studies have been conducted in
the recent decades, which led to identification of genes
whose function disorder is associated with an increased
risk of occurrence of malignant breast or ovarian cancer. The most important are genes BRCA1 and BRCA2
(breast cancer susceptibility 1 and 2) fulfilling the function of tumor suppressor genes in a cell. The occurrence



of changes in the coding sequence may lead to the
development of hereditary syndromes called HBC-SS
(Hereditary Breast Cancer Site Specific) or HBOC (Hereditary Breast Ovarian Cancer) syndrome, which manifest themselves in the form of breast and/or ovarian
cancer. The correlation of epidemiologic and population
studies has allowed for the estimation of the number of
familial breast and/or ovarian cancer cases. They constitute about 10% of all newly diagnosed neoplasms of
these organs. Identification of mutations in BRCA1
or BRCA2 genes is associated with an increased risk
of occurrence of breast and/or ovarian cancer in 65%
or 45% of mutation carriers, respectively, depending
on the mutation type. The hereditary syndromes
caused by BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations are associated with several clinical symptoms, which may require
a complex molecular analysis in the patient. The first,
basic criterion is early age of breast and/or ovarian cancer occurrence, usually in relatively young people below
45 years of age. The second criterion that is taken into
account is the identification of familial aggregation of
breast and/or ovarian cancer cases in first- and seconddegree relatives on a pedigree. Lack of the abovedescribed aggregation, in the presence of other clinical
circumstances, cannot prevent doctors from performing molecular diagnostics in such patients. As it was
demonstrated in molecular screening of an unselected
population of breast cancer patients, in 35% to 50% of
the patients who were BRCA mutation carriers, no familial history was found. Due to this fact, the leading
medical societies such as ASCO (American Society of
Clinical Oncology), ESMO (European Society for Medical
Oncology), NCCN (The National Comprehensive Cancer Network) or NICE (The National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence) have drafted guidelines concerning molecular diagnostics, defining a group of patients
who should undergo examination, in whom there is the
highest risk of occurrence of mutations in BRCA1 or
BRCA2 genes. The guidelines differ slightly as they have
to consider genetic variations of different populations
as well as socioeconomic conditions. However, they all
assume the necessity of performing genetic testing to
evaluate the presence of BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutations in patients diagnosed with breast cancer by the
age of 35. The examination should also be performed
in all patients diagnosed with breast cancer by the age
of 40 whose tumor was characterized by lack of estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptor overexpression
(triple negative patients). Genetic consultation is also
recommended to patients with bilateral breast cancer
and family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer, especially if the tumor occurred by the age of 50, as well
as in men diagnosed with breast cancer. The indication for the examination of mutations in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes may also be a family history of prostate
cancer at an early age, pancreatic cancer or malignant



melanoma. Nevertheless, despite meeting the criteria qualifying patients for molecular examination, in
over 90% of tested patients no mutations are found in
BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes, which does not exclude, however, the familial background of the neoplastic disease. One of the reasons for this outcome may be the
scope of mutations analysis on a molecular level, which
does not always fully reflect the “mutation status” of
a given population or an individual patient. It most frequently results from economic considerations limiting
the analysis to the most frequent mutations in a given
population, which leads to overlooking mutations occurring in a given population in only a small percentage
of cases but still disrupting the functions of BRCA1 or
BRCA2 genes. The quality of the performed molecular
evaluation is also strongly influenced by the selection
of the analyzed genes resulting from the quality of the
pedigree as well as prioritizing the information of neoplastic diseases over the one without any direct connection with the initial diagnosis. Omitting pedigree
information, apparently not associated with the basic
disease, which may suggest the existence of other hereditary processes may direct the doctor’s attention to
conclusions excluding the analysis of mutations of other genes that are significantly involved in the neoplastic
transformation such as CHEK2 (checkpoint kinase 2),
PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog), PALB2 (partner and localizer of BRCA2), RAD51C (S. cerevisiae, homolog of, C), CDH1 (cadherin 1) or genes determining
Lynch syndrome. Analyzing the function of genes
in the process of development of familial breast and/
or ovarian cancers, one must remember that it can be
to a certain degree modified under the influence of
environmental factors or result from single nucleotide
polymorphisms.
Also the role of natural hormonal changes taking
place in the period of maturation and their influence
on the risk of occurrence of breast cancer in adult life
is very interesting. As it was pointed out in a work of
Hsieh et al., early menarche is associated with a higher
risk of occurrence of breast cancer due to a longer period of exposure to estrogens activity [20]. Each delay of
menarche by 2 years reduces the risk of occurrence of
breast cancer by 10%. What is interesting, in women in
whom menarche occurred before the age of 12, estrogen expression in each menstrual cycle is higher than
in women who had menarche after the age of 13.
There is a slightly different correlation between the risk
of occurrence of breast cancer and age of the first successful pregnancy. Early pregnancy and due date delivery has a protective value and is associated with a lower risk of breast cancer. This correlation mostly concerns
women with hormone dependent (ER positive) breast
cancer diagnosed in the postmenopausal period.
Similar protective activity, decreasing the risk of occurrence of breast cancer is provided by prolonged breast-



feeding. As it is estimated on the basis of epidemiologic observations, each year of breastfeeding reduces
the risk of neoplastic disease by 4.3%. Unfortunately, this effect has not been observed in European
countries, which is most often connected with cultural
habits and drive for quick return to professional activity, thus shortening the period of breastfeeding. The
correlation of the above-described observations with
the presence of mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes
showed a 32% breast cancer risk reduction in BRCA1
mutation carriers who breastfed their children for
a year or longer. However, a similar phenomenon has
not been observed in carriers of BRCA2 gene mutation. Moreover, in breastfeeding women, in whom breast
cancer does occur, tumors with super-expression of the
estrogen receptor occur three times more frequently
than in women who have never breastfed. This observation is hard to explain. It seems that breastfeeding facilitates correct differentiation of epithelial cells of the
lactiferous ducts thanks to which they are less susceptible to the activity of mutagenic factors and disorders on
the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) level, which can occur
during the cell replication process. Also the age of
menopause is not irrelevant to the risk of occurrence of
breast cancer. A literature review clearly demonstrates
that each year of continuing menstruation increases
the risk of breast cancer by 3%. This observation is also
confirmed by a 50% reduction in the breast cancer risk
in women who underwent ovariectomy by the age of
40. This phenomenon is especially visible in the group
of carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations.
When talking about intrinsic factors one must not
forget about proliferative lesions of benign character
occurring in mammary glands. They are benign, however, they can significantly increase the risk of occurrence of malignant lesions. Based on the epidemiologic
data, in the group of women diagnosed with benign
proliferative lesions of the mammary glands with cellular atypia and familial aggregation of breast neoplasms in first- and second-degree relatives there was
an 11-fold increase in the breast cancer risk compared
to women without cellular atypia and family history of
cancer.

Extrinsic factors conditioning breast
cancer occurrence
One of basic groups of extrinsic factors modifying
the risk of breast cancer occurrence includes dietary
habits, which may lead to obesity occurring especially
frequently in populations of developed countries. Eating
products that are rich in fat, leading to excess weight
or obesity, as well as processed products containing
a range of chemical substances, used to enhance flavor or preserve food, may be a factor promoting the
neoplastic transformation process in mammary gland

cells. This correlation, especially when observed
in women in the postmenopausal period, is associated
with an increased risk of occurrence of breast cancer
without an overexpression of estrogen, progesterone or
HER2 receptors. The above-described observations
have been confirmed by Saxe et al. The authors
showed that using low-fat diet in a group of women after menopause, who were treated for neoplastic disease,
significantly decreased the risk of neoplasm relapse after the primary surgical procedure. The above-described
observations also provide the basis for recommending
physical activity to a group of obese women with breast
cancer after the primary surgical procedure. The studies
proved that regular physical activity, with a frequency of
3-5 times a week reduces the risk of breast cancer occurrence by 20-40%, reinforces the immunological system, improves general fitness and the quality of life.
A significant role in the modification of the risk of
occurrence of neoplastic disease is played by dietary
habits typical for a given age group or population. Eating products containing a large amount of anti-oxidants
or rich in vitamin D may lead to a 20% reduction in the
relative risk of breast cancer. The risk may increase as a result of drinking even a small amount of alcohol as it affects estrogen metabolism in the liver.

Endogenous sex hormone blood
concentration, hormonal therapy
and breast cancer risk
A high endogenous estrogen level is a well-defined
risk factor contributing to a higher incidence of breast
cancer. The analysis of prospective studies confirmed
a strong association between increasing concentrations
of sex hormones (total estradiol, free estradiol, estrone,
estrone sulfate, androstenedione, dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and testosterone) in postmenopausal women and a higher breast
cancer risk. The significance of these data among
premenopausal women is less clear partially because of
a cycle-dependent variability of the hormone concentration in this group. Available studies on large cohorts
of observed participants suggest that levels of circulating estrogens and androgens may also play an important role in the etiology of premenopausal breast cancer. The results of the Nurses’ Health Study II
support another thesis that premenopausal levels
of estrogens and androgens may be important for the
development of postmenopausal disease. The influence of serum hormone levels on the risk of development of different breast cancer subtypes according to
the receptor status was studied by Farhat et al.
The analysis revealed that higher serum levels of bioavailable testosterone may be associated with lower
risks of ER-negative breast cancer. On the other hand,
both testosterone and estradiol were correlated with an



increased risk of ER-positive disease in postmenopausal women.
Exemestane, anastrozole and letrozole are aromatase inhibitors (AIs) that are known to inhibit the
enzyme responsible for the conversion of androgens to
estrogens and thus these drugs decrease blood estrogen levels in postmenopausal women. Taken together
the above data prompted numerous studies evaluating AIs to lower the risk of breast cancer. The NCIC CTG
MAP.3 trial was a prospective double-blind trial that
investigated the role of exemestane in reducing the
incidence of invasive breast cancer in postmenopausal
women who were determined to be at increased risk.
The trial revealed a significant 65% relative reduction in
the annual incidence of invasive breast cancer among
the investigated drug group with no statistically significant differences in the incidence of serious adverse
events between groups. Another phase III trial that
evaluated the AIs in postmenopausal women at high
risk of breast cancer was IBIS-II in which anastrozole
was associated with a 53% reduction in the incidence
of invasive breast cancer and DCIS (ductal carcinoma
in situ) when compared with placebo – the effect was
significant in ER positive disease. Current ASCO
clinical practice guidelines recommend exemestane
as an alternative option to tamoxifen or raloxifene to
reduce the risk of invasive breast cancer, specifically
ER-positive in postmenopausal women at increased risk
of breast cancer or with LCIS (lobular carcinoma in situ)
or atypical hyperplasia. This indication was not accepted by the European Medicines Agency.
The relationship between oral contraception (OC)
and the risk of breast cancer still remains controversial.
Some studies have suggested that using oral hormonal
contraceptives increases the risk of breast cancer by
24% compared to women who have never used them
, and the largest incidence increase is observed in the
course of using the contraception. On the other hand,
the reanalysis of epidemiological studies showed a little or even no association between the risk of breast
cancer and oral contraception. The differences between analyses could be also associated with changes
in formulations of oral contraceptives during past decades. Moreover, different oral contraceptive formulations could lead to different risks of breast cancer. It
was also described that the risk of occurrence of breast
cancer drops significantly 10 years after discontinuing
hormonal therapy and it is not dependent on the duration of their usage. In the 1990s, the Collaborative
Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer confirmed
no significant risk of breast cancer diagnosed 10 or
more years after stopping OC (RR 1.01). Moreover, the
cancers diagnosed in women who had used combined
OC were less advanced clinically compared to never
users. In the large, prospective study (116 608 females and 1 246 967 person-years of follow-up) was


found that only one formulation of oral contraception
was related to an increase in the risk of breast cancer
in comparison with never OC users – triphasic ethinyl
estradiol combined with levonorgestrel (RR 3.05). It
should be underlined that non-triphasic formulations
with levonorgestrel were not associated with increasing the risk of breast cancer . Other recent evidence
suggests that triphasic OC formulation levonorgestrel is
not associated with an increased risk of breast cancer.
Further analyses did not show any significantly increase
in the breast cancer risk among women aged 35 to 64
(current or former OC users). The relative risk was 1.0
for women who were currently using OC and 0.9 for using in the past. The analysis highlights the lack of association between taking OC and an increased risk of
breast cancer in women with a family history of this
cancer. In another multicenter, population-based
study, women were asked about OC formulation used
in the past. The most common used formulations were
monophasic (100 µg mestranol/1.0 mg ethynodiol diacetate; 35 µg ethinyl estradiol/0.5 mg norethindrone;
35 µg ethinyl estradiol/1.0 mg norethindrone; 50 µg
mestranol/1.0 mg norethindrone; 80 µg mestranol/
1.0 mg norethindrone; 100 µg mestranol/2.0 mg nor­
ethindrone; 100 µg mestranol/2.5 mg norethindrone;
30 µg ethinyl estradiol/0.3 mg norgestrel; 50 µg ethinyl estradiol/0.5 mg norgestrel) and only one was multiphasic (35 µg ethinyl estradiol/0.5 mg (one week)/0.75
mg (one week)/1.0 mg (one week) norethindrone).
Based on multivariable analyses the researchers did
not observe any significant correlation between OC
formulation and increasing the breast cancer risk [42].
The retrospective analysis of a population-based study
(5113 breast cancer cases and 20 452 controls) did not
show any association between use of levonorgestrel
releasing intrauterine devices (IUD) and the increase
in breast cancer. The recent evidence also excluded
that levonorgestrel IUD could have any promotional
effect on tumor growth [43]. Very interesting conclusions were obtained in a study in which a lower degree of neoplastic disease progression at the time of
diagnosis was observed in women using hormonal
contraceptives compared to women who had never
used them [40].
Using oral hormonal menopause therapy is associated with an increase in the breast cancer risk, which
was correlated with the length of therapy, 15% in the
case of 5 years and 34% in the case of 10 years [2]. The
risk of occurrence of breast cancer is additionally enhanced by the use of two-component oral menopausal
hormone therapy containing estrogen and progesterone (especially conjugated equine estrogens – CEE and
medroxyprogesterone acetate – MPA) [44]. It should be
noticed that the type of progestin may be a risk factor
for breast cancer. Use of a synthetic medroxyprogesterone acetate may increase the number of cell division in



mammary tissue and may cause greater proliferation
of abnormal cells. Some authors observed that intake
of natural progesterone did not result in the increase in
the breast cancer risk however, further long-term studies are needed to clarify this hypothesis. The impact
of androgens on promoting and development of breast
cancer was unclear for many years. The risk of breast
cancer associated with use of menopausal hormone
therapy containing testosterone was assessed in the
Nurses’ Health Study (24 years of follow-up; 1 359 323
person-years). It was found in this study that the risk of
breast cancer was nearly 2.5-fold greater among current
users of estrogen plus testosterone therapies compared
to never users of hormonal therapy. Based on results it
was calculated that the risk of breast cancer associated
with the current use of estrogen and testosterone therapy was significantly greater compared with estrogenonly and slightly greater than estrogen-progestin therapy (EPT). The increase in the breast cancer risk was 17%
per year of taking HT containing testosterone. One
of the observations during the Women’s Health Initiative Study (WHI) was the fact that menopausal hormone
therapy had a delayed effect on the incidence of breast
cancer – during the first 2 years of observation followup, the incidence was reduced even by 41% and it could
be associated with increasing of density of breast tissue and decreasing the sensitivity of mammography.
That is why, small tumors could be undiagnosed in the
early stages and they were detected after two years in
an advanced grade [47]. Based on WHI trial results it
was shown that the use of an EPT combination is associated with an increase in breast density of 4.9% after
two years. Unopposed estrogen therapy (ET) increased
by 2.9% the density of breast tissue. Moreover, use of
EPT led to an increasing number of abnormal results of
mammography and the need for more invasive diagnostic method – breast biopsy.
Estrogen-progestin therapy is associated with an increase in percent mammographic density (PMD) – the
proportion of the total breast area occupied by dense
tissue. There is a relationship between changes in PMD
and the use of exogenous hormones. The use of EPT
is directly associated with extensive percent mammographic density and led to an increase in PMD by 3-5%
and the estrogen alone therapy increased PMD by 1.2%. On the other hand, use of an anti-estrogenic drugs
(raloxifene, tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors) results
in decreasing PMD, even by 13.7% over 4.5 years.
The risk of breast cancer was reduced by 52% in patients
who observed a decrease in PMD of over 10%. It should
be noticed that use of tibolone did not change percent
mammographic density. Histopathological analysis has
shown that extensive PMD is associated with a greater
number of cells and total nuclear area (including epithelial and non-epithelial cells) and an increased amount
of collagen and glandular structures.

Systemic menopausal hormone therapy should be
avoided in women who have gene mutations (BRCA1,
BRCA2) or first-degree relatives with breast cancer or
atypical findings in breast biopsy. Use of EPT for less
than three years probably does not increase the breast
cancer risk significantly but it can impede the detection
the early stages of breast cancer.

