

Adoption of urbanised lifestyles together with changes in reproductive behaviour might partly underlie the continued
rise in worldwide incidence of breast cancer. Widespread mammographic screening and eﬀective systemic therapies
have led to a stage shift at presentation and mortality reductions in the past two decades. Loco-regional control of the
disease seems to aﬀect long-term survival, and attention to surgical margins together with improved radiotherapy
techniques could further contribute to mortality gains. Developments in oncoplastic surgery and partial-breast
reconstruction have improved cosmetic outcomes after breast-conservation surgery. Optimum approaches for
delivering chest-wall radiotherapy in the context of immediate breast reconstruction present special challenges.
Accurate methods for intraoperative assessment of sentinel lymph nodes remain a clinical priority. Clinical trials are
investigating combinatorial therapies that use novel agents targeting growth factor receptors, signal transduction
pathways, and tumour angiogenesis. Gene-expression proﬁling oﬀers the potential to provide accurate prognostic
and predictive information, with selection of best possible therapy for individuals and avoidance of overtreatment and
undertreatment of patients with conventional chemotherapy. Short-term presurgical studies in the neoadjuvant
setting allow monitoring of proliferative indices, and changes in gene-expression patterns can be predictive of
response to therapies and long-term outcome.

Introduction
Breast cancer remains the most common malignancy in
women worldwide and is the leading cause of cancer-related
mortality.1 More than 1·2 million cases are diagnosed
every year, aﬀecting 10–12% of the female population and
accounting for 500 000 deaths per year worldwide. Despite
a higher prevalence of breast cancer in industrialised than
in non-industrialised countries, incidence rates are
steadily increasing in less aﬄuent societies.2 Breast cancer
is mainly a postmenopausal disease, with more than
three-quarters of tumours hormone responsive. This
hormone dependency interacts with environmental and
genetic factors to determine incidence and progression of
the disease. Lifestyle and environmental eﬀects are
potentially modiﬁable risk factors and oﬀer the prospect
of interventions that might ultimately reduce the global
burden of the disease.3 The documented decrease in
breast-cancer rates in the USA in 2003, after a gradual rise
during the preceding 30 years, exempliﬁes the eﬀect of
risk modiﬁcation. This reduction has been linked to
decreased use of exogenous hormones after adverse
reports of an association with increased breast-cancer risk4
and a possible reduction in the uptake of screening
mammography in view of its debatable modest beneﬁt.
Mortality rates for breast cancer have fallen in many
industrialised nations since around 1990, having
previously been stable or increasing for several consecutive
decades.5–7 These falls in mortality have been attributed
mainly to the introduction of mammographic screening
programmes and the widespread use of adjuvant systemic
therapies with tamoxifen.8 A US population-based study
showed that these mortality trends are accentuated in
women with oestrogen-receptor-positive tumours
compared with those with hormone-insensitive disease.9
Moreover, this decrease in mortality was almost exclusively
conﬁned to women younger than 70 years (ﬁgure 1). This
Seminar will focus on the epidemiology, diagnosis, and
management of early breast cancer when there is no overt

evidence of distant metastases and for which treatment
intent is curative. Some patients can be cured with locoregional treatment alone whereas many will have
undetectable micrometastatic disease and require
adjuvant systemic therapy.

Epidemiology
Age and female sex are major risk factors for breast
cancer, with incidence rates rising rapidly between the
ages of 35 and 39 years and subsequently levelling to a
plateau after 80 years.10 Nonetheless, the rate of increase
slows around the age of 50 years, corresponding to the
average age of menopause, which creates a point of
inﬂection in the age-speciﬁc incidence curve known as
Clemmesen’s hook (ﬁgure 2).11 This transition point is an
indicator of the conﬂuence of two separate rate curves for
oestrogen-receptor-positive and negative tumours that
have fairly favourable and poor prognoses, respectively.10
The incidence of oestrogen-receptor-negative tumours
increases rapidly until age 50 years and then ﬂattens or
decreases. By contrast, the incidence of oestrogenreceptor-positive tumours is similar up to the age of
50 years, but then continues to climb at a slower pace.


Search strategy and selection criteria
We searched the Cochrane Library and Medline between
1998, and 2008, with the term ”breast cancer”. In section of
publications, we used discretion from our perception of the
importance of the articles on the basis of citation within the
medical published work and at major international
conferences (San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposia;
American Society of Clinical Oncology meetings). We restricted
searches to the past 5 years, but some older referenced papers
were collated from our personal collections. Some review
articles have been cited to provide a more comprehensive list
of references than is permissible in this Seminar.




Thus oestrogen-receptor-negative tumours tend to occur
earlier in life and oestrogen-receptor-positive tumours
are more common in older women. The peak ages of
onset for these two tumour phenotypes are 50 and
70 years of age, respectively, and they seem to have
diﬀerent underlying causes and pathobiology.
Reproductive and anthropomorphic factors have
opposing eﬀects, with nulliparity, obesity, and oral
contraceptive use decreasing the risk of early-onset breast
cancers while increasing the risk in older women.12–14
There are pronounced racial diﬀerences in the incidence
and mortality of breast cancer.15 Although age-standardised
incidence rates are higher in white women than in those
of African-American descent, these rates cross at about
age 50 years. At younger ages, breast-cancer incidence
rates are higher in African-American women, whereas
rates are greater in their white counterparts at 50 years of
age and older. Age-adjusted breast-cancer mortality rates
were congruent between African-Americans and white
Americans until the early 1980s, but thereafter a continued
divergence was evident with higher mortality rates for
African-American than for white people.16 These
diﬀerential mortality rates coincided with the introduction
of mammographic screening in conjunction with
adjuvant systemic therapy as an integral component of



breast-cancer management.16 Black women have a higher
proportion of oestrogen-receptor-negative tumours than
do white women and are therefore less likely to receive
endocrine treatment. Furthermore, socioeconomic
variation leads to inequalities in terms of health-insurance
cover and educational attainment, which are likely to
restrict access to new treatments and screening
programmes for ethnic groups. A combination of intrinsic
diﬀerences in response and health-care provision might
account for the widening racial disparity in breast-cancer
mortality rates within the USA.16,17
Familial forms of breast cancer incorporate both high
and low genetic risk. When several ﬁrst-degree relatives
are aﬀected, clustering is probably hereditary and
attributable to high-risk susceptibility genes such as
BRCA1 and BRCA2.18 These are tumour suppressor
genes that display an autosomal dominant pattern of
inheritance with variable penetrance. Mutations within
these two genes account for around three-quarters of
hereditary breast cancer cases (5–10% of all breast cancer)
and confer a lifetime risk of between 80–85% by age
70 years.19 Additionally, BRCA1 mutations are associated
with ovarian cancer risk of 20–40%. Within cells, the
eﬀects of BRCA1 and BRCA2 are recessive, and both
copies of an allele must be lost or mutated for cancer

Rate per 100 000 woman-years

progression. Individuals with a germline mutation in
these genes have a dominantly inherited susceptibility,
and the second so-called hit occurs in the somatic copy.
Tumours from genetically predisposed patients show
loss of heterozygosity in the wild-type BRCA1 allele,20 but
mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 are uncommon in
sporadic breast cancers. Other genes involved in genetic
predisposition include p53 (Li-Fraumeni syndrome),
AT (ataxia telangiectasia), and PTEN (breast and thyroid
cancer). Low penetrance genes such as CHEK mutations
might collectively be responsible for up to 25% of familial
cases; although they confer a reduced risk, they are more
prevalent within the population.21
Breast-cancer risk is modulated by factors aﬀecting the
hormonal milieu; most mammary tumours are
stimulated by oestrogens, and oestrogen-receptor-negative
tumours can evolve from oestrogen-receptor-positive
lesions rather than arising de novo. A woman’s
cumulative lifetime exposure to oestrogen determines
the level of this environmental risk. Thus early menarche
(<12 years vs 16 years) and late menopause (>55 years vs
<45 years) are associated with relative risk increases of
about 1·2.3 Levels of oestrogen and rates of proliferation
in breast epithelium are low after menopause, which
when induced iatrogenically at younger than 40 years of
age reduces the risk of breast cancer by almost two-thirds.3
A ﬁrst full-term pregnancy at younger than 20 years of
age is protective for breast cancer, and high circulating
concentrations of progesterone can cause terminal
diﬀerentiation in pluripotential stem cells of immature
breast tissue. Nulliparity is a well known risk factor for
breast cancer since Ramizzini described horrendis
mammarium canceris in Catholic nuns.22 However,
women who defer childbearing beyond 35 years of age
have an increased relative risk compared with nulliparous
women, which might have relevance to contemporary
reproductive practices in which late pregnancies are
associated with prolonged use of the oral contraceptive
pill and a greater chance of pregnancy-related breast
cancer.
Hormone-replacement therapy increases the relative
risk of breast cancer by roughly 35% after 10 years of use,
although cancers developing in women who have ever
used this therapy tend to be of more favourable prognosis.24
Hormone-replacement therapy should be avoided in
breast-cancer survivors, and more than doubles the risk of
recurrence.25 Moderately vigorous physical activity of up to
7 h per week can reduce the risk of breast cancer by
almost 20%, and this eﬀect is independent of menstrual
function. Daily strenuous exercises reduce risk by up to
50% in women aged 14–22 years.26 Alcohol consumption
increases breast-cancer risk irrespective of the type of
beverage consumed.27 High mammographic breast density
is a powerful independent predictor of breast-cancer risk
and is associated with an increased ratio of glandular to
fatty tissue.28 Only a quarter of sporadic cases of breast
cancer have any identiﬁable risk factor.

Diagnosis
About three-quarters of symptomatic breast cancers
will present with a discrete breast lump. However, most
patients referred to a breast clinic with a lump will have
benign disease, and initial clinical examination will aim
to establish whether a dominant mass or localised
glandular nodularity is present. The physical
characteristics of benign and malignant breast lumps
overlap substantially. Thus complete clinical evaluation
involves triple assessment, integrating information
from clinical examination, radiological imaging, and
percutaneous needle biopsy. A diagnostic mammogram
can conﬁrm a clinical suspicion of malignancy and
typically shows a spiculate opacity or microcalciﬁcation. It can sometimes show the extent of malignancy
(especially when associated with microcalciﬁcation) and
identify occult (non-palpable) lesions in the ipsilateral
or contralateral breast. Mammography does not
show evidence of malignancy in 10% of patients with
breast cancer.

Breast ultrasound with 12–15 MHz transducers is
complementary to mammography and increases
diagnostic accuracy. It provides a measurement of tumour
size, correlating well with pathological estimates.30 Modern
ultrasound devices incorporate a Doppler facility and are
increasingly being used to image the axillary nodes and
deselect patients for sentinel-lymph-node biopsy. Tissue
diagnosis is essential and can be obtained with either
ﬁne-needle aspiration cytology or core biopsy. Before
image-guided biopsy techniques, most tissue acquisition
involved open excision or incision biopsy. Percutaneous
needle-biopsy techniques can now provide a deﬁnitive
diagnosis for most benign and malignant diseases.31
Although ﬁne-needle aspiration cytology simply, quickly,
and cost-eﬀectively establishes tissue diagnosis, it has
lower sensitivity and speciﬁcity than does core biopsy.31
Despite false-negative results with both, core biopsy with
wide-bore needle is preferred to ﬁne-needle aspiration
cytology and yields solid cores of tissue that maintain
tissue architecture and allow distinction between invasive
and non-invasive carcinoma.32 Biopsy samples of mass
lesions can be taken with ultrasound or stereotactic
guidance, whereas microcalciﬁcation usually mandates
stereotactic methods.33 The standard core-biopsy needle is
either 14 or 16 gauge, but larger volumes of tissue can be
obtained from vacuum-assisted core biopsy devices with a
range of needle sizes, but most often an 11 gauge needle.
Vacuum-assisted core-biopsy devices reduce the chance of
underdiagnosis and increase the chance of obtaining a
deﬁnitive preoperative diagnosis, allowing appropriate
planning of breast-cancer surgery.34
When clinical examination, radiology, and core biopsy
or ﬁne-needle aspiration cytology show benign features
only, the probability of malignancy is very low. A
diagnostic (surgical) excision biopsy is warranted in the
absence of concordance, although repeat core-needle
biopsy can be attempted. MRI is used selectively in the
diagnostic workup of breast-cancer patients to clarify the
extent of a lesion and establish whether satellite foci are
present in patients otherwise amenable to breastconservation surgery.35 However, evidence suggests that
patients assessed with MRI are more likely to
undergo (unnecessary) mastectomy instead of breastconservation surgery.36,37 Rates of ipsilateral breast tumour
recurrence (IBTR) are fairly low—at 8 years rates are
similar in patients receiving breast-conservation surgery
with (3%) and without (4%) preoperative MRI
imaging38—and additional lesions detected by MRI might
not be clinically relevant or might be adequately treated
with adjuvant therapies.39
A substantial proportion of breast cancers in the USA
and western Europe are detected with screening
mammography. Randomised controlled trials have
conﬁrmed that screening mammography with or without
clinical breast examination in postmenopausal women
reduces breast-cancer mortality by about 20%.40 The use
of screening mammography in premenopausal women


remains controversial, and is probably not cost eﬀective.41
Some suggest that clinical breast examination should
accompany mammographic screening, since some
cancers are radiologically occult but clinically palpable.42
Breast self-examination has not yet proven beneﬁcial in
clinical trials.43 Breast MRI screening has been
recommended for high-risk women with BRCA1/2
mutation carriage.44 The sensitivity of breast MRI and
cancer-detection rates within this group are better than
with mammography; however, data from prospective
randomised controlled trials assessing the eﬀect on
breast-cancer mortality are scarce.

Biological hypotheses
Two biological notions of tumour pathogenesis have
guided strategies for loco-regional and systemic treatment
of breast cancer.45 According to the Halstedian paradigm,
breast cancer is a localised disease at inception with
progressive and sequential spread from local tissues to
lymph nodes and in turn haematogenous dissemination.
IBTR is considered a cause of distant metastases, with the
chance of cure related to the extent of primary loco-regional
treatment. The Fisherian paradigm presupposes that
breast cancer is predominantly a systemic disease at the
outset, with cancer cells entering the bloodstream at an
early stage of tumour development. Circulating tumour
cells might be destroyed by the immune system, but some
will establish viable micrometastatic foci at distant sites.
Micrometastases at the time of diagnosis will determine a
patient’s clinical fate. IBTR is regarded as an indicator of
distant-relapse risk and indicates a host-tumour relation
that favours development of distant disease or activation
of processes leading to a kick start of micrometastases.
This notion of biological predeterminism has dominated
approaches to breast-cancer management over the past
three decades and emphasised the importance of systemic
therapies targeting distant micrometastatic disease.
Long-term follow-up of the largest breast conservation
trial (NSABP B-06) at 20 years suggests that variations in
extent of loco-regional treatments do not aﬀect overall
survival,46 supporting the idea that local recurrence is an
indicator of risk for development of distant disease that
reﬂects intrinsic biology of the tumour.47 Several studies
have shown that IBTR is the strongest independent
predictor of distant relapse, conferring an increased risk
of up to three-fold to four-fold.48 Although IBTR contributes
roughly a third to the overall recurrence risk (Blamey R,
University of Nottingham, personal communication),
whether IBTR is causally related to distant relapse or
merely associated with survival is unknown.
In a meta-analysis by the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’
Collaborative Group (EBCTCG), local radiation treatment
to either the breast after breast-conservation surgery or
the chest wall after mastectomy showed an overall
survival beneﬁt at 15 years.49 For treatment comparisons
in which the diﬀerence in local recurrence rates at 5 years
was less than 10%, survival was unaﬀected. 
diﬀerences in local relapse were substantial (>10%),
moderate reductions in breast-cancer-speciﬁc and overall
mortality were recorded. Absolute reductions were
19% for local recurrence at 5 years and 5% for breastcancer mortality at 15 years, representing one life saved
for every four loco-regional recurrences prevented by
radiotherapy at 5 years. This analysis showed conclusively
that diﬀerences in loco-regional treatments that substantially improve rates of local control will aﬀect
long-term survival of patients with breast cancer. Local
control does matter and rates of local recurrence should
be kept to a minimum in the ﬁrst 5 years. Up to a quarter
of local recurrences will be a determinant and not simply
an indicator of risk for distant relapse and death.
Molecular proﬁling can help to predict the biological
behaviour and pattern of spread for individual tumours
and avoid undertreatment and overtreatment with both
loco-regional and systemic therapies.50 Malignant stem
cells are either quiescent or cycle fairly slowly, and are
resistant to conventional chemotherapy. Their ability to
self-renew provides the opportunity for regeneration and
clinical recurrence of cancer. Identiﬁcation of biochemical
pathways that are unique to cancer stem cells will allow
selective targeting of this important subpopulation of
tumour cells. Cellular response to therapies should be
anticipated and escape mechanisms co-targeted.

Surgery
The introduction of conservative surgery for breast cancer
coincided with reduced tumour size at presentation and
a shift in the underlying biological hypothesis. Breastconservation surgery is now an established procedure
and the preferred standard of care for management of
women with early-stage breast cancer. Instigation of
widespread mammographic screening has contributed
to a stage shift for newly diagnosed disease, with an
average tumour size at presentation of less than 2 cm. At
least two-thirds of patients are eligible for breastconservation surgery, but rates of mastectomy vary both
geographically and institutionally.51 Selection of patients
for this surgery is crucial, with an inverse relation
between competing oncological demands for surgical
radicality and cosmesis. A balance exists between the risk
of IBTR and cosmetic results, with oncoplastic surgery
advancing the limits of surgical resection.
Two factors emerge as principal determinants of true
local recurrence within the conserved breast: margin
status and the presence or absence of an extensive in-situ
component. Lymphatic invasion and young age (<35 years)
are primary predictors for increased risk of IBTR.
Consistent associations have been recorded for larger
tumour size (>2 cm) and higher histological grade but not
for tumour subtype or nodal status.52 Results of the
EBCTCG overview have reinforced the link between local
control and mortality, leading to an emphasis on adequacy
of surgical excision and other treatment-related variables
such as radiotherapy.49 Attainment of gross macroscopic


clearance of the tumour at operation is no longer
acceptable; all radial margins should be clear of tumour
microscopically. A positive resection margin has not been
uniformly deﬁned, which has compounded issues relating
to microscopically negative margins and degrees of
surgical clearance—eg, how wide must a negative margin
be to result in acceptable rates of local recurrence
(1–2% per year)? Many surgeons regard a margin
clearance of 2–3 mm to be appropriate, although up to
45% of American radiation oncologists consider a margin
as negative provided that no tumour cells are at the inked
edge.53 Others strive for a radial margin clearance of
5 mm, which can lead to re-excision rates of up to 50% but
is associated with very low rates of IBTR. Detection of
further tumour is unusual when re-excision is done to
achieve a wider margin rather than a negative margin.
Singletary54 has provided a useful analysis, showing
median rates of IBTR of 3%, 6%, and 2% when margins
of clearance were 1 mm, 2 mm, or just clear, respectively.
Thus although rates of recurrence are determined by
negative margin status, no direct relation exists between
margin width and rates of local recurrence. When the
ﬁrst re-excision fails to achieve surgical clearance,
mastectomy is often indicated and becomes necessary if
margins remain positive after a reasonable number of
surgical attempts (up to three).
Practices are consistent with the notion that IBTR
develops from re-growth of residual cancer cells in
peritumoral tissue. Moreover, the invasive element confers
the increased risk of distant failure; when local recurrence
is exclusively ductal carcinoma in situ, features of the
original primary tumour will determine systemic risk.
Most patients considered suitable for breast-conservation
surgery will have a unifocal tumour measuring 3 cm or
less and lying more than 2 cm from the nipple areolar
complex. These patients usually have a favourable ratio of
tumour to breast size and are amenable to conventional
forms of wide local excision in which the tumour is excised
with a roughly 2 cm margin of surrounding breast tissue
without the need for any formal breast remodelling.
Although a re-excision might be needed in up to a quarter
of cases to achieve microscopically clear radial margins,
an optimum cosmetic result should be attained after
irradiation of the remaining breast tissue. Notwithstanding
attempts at breast-conservation surgery, mastectomy is
clearly indicated for some patients on the basis of tumour
size or location, multifocality, an inﬂammatory component,
or patient choice. Achievement of a good cosmetic
outcome becomes progressively more diﬃcult as the
proportion of breast tissue removed increases. Although
the absolute volume of tissue excised is surgeon
dependent, a greater percentage is associated with larger
tumours. When more than 10–20% of breast volume is
removed, results might be unsatisfactory cosmetically.56
Partial-breast reconstruction with oncoplastic procedures
often allow wide resection of tissue, increasing the chance
of tumour-free margins. Despite these techniques


providing an opportunity for enhancing quality of life by
improving cosmetic outcome and psychological wellbeing,57 there are no long-term follow-up data to
substantiate the claim for reduced rates of local relapse.
Moreover, transposition of glandular tissue could
jeopardise accurate targeting of any radiotherapy boost,
unless it is given intraoperatively. Therapeutic mammoplasty can potentially improve cosmetic outcome when
tumour size or location would otherwise lead to suboptimum cosmesis after conventional breast-conservation
surgery (ﬁgure 3).58 Strict oncological selection criteria
should still be applied;59 when the estimated risk for IBTR
is high, despite clear margins and a good cosmetic result,
mastectomy with immediate breast reconstruction should
be oﬀered. The development of oncoplastic surgery and
partial-breast reconstruction has improved the application
of breast-conservation surgery to management of breast
cancer, but careful patient selection is crucial. Often a
contralateral procedure is required for symmetrisation,
particularly when volume displacement rather than
replacement techniques are used.
Most patients who are healthy and younger than 70 years
with a non-inﬂammatory or locally advanced tumour
should be oﬀered immediate breast reconstruction
together with a skin-sparing mastectomy in which the
nipple areolar complex is removed but much of the breast
skin envelope remains. Skin-sparing mastectomy
represents the latest phase in development of less
mutilating forms of mastectomy and has revolutionised
results of immediate breast reconstruction by preserving
the inframammary fold and avoiding the need for
resculpturing of any imported skin or tissue expansion of
residual chest-wall skin. No evidence suggests increased
rates of local recurrence with skin-sparing mastectomy,
and the precise skin incision should be tailored to the


individual patient with removal of any involved skin
overlying a tumour.61 Breast volume can be reconstituted
with a variety of techniques including subpectoral tissue
expander, extended autologous latissimus-dorsi ﬂap,
implant-assisted latissimus-dorsi ﬂap, or a free/pedicled
transverse rectus abdominus ﬂap. Judicious patient
selection and joint decision-making will help keep any
disparity between patient expectation and clinical reality
to a minimum and maximise satisfaction.
Many women now receive postmastectomy radiotherapy.49,62,63 Anticipation of chest-wall irradiation will
aﬀect the choice of reconstructive technique; an
implant-only reconstruction is generally avoided when
postmastectomy radiotherapy is a possibility.64 The
potential problems of capsular contracture in this group
of patients with implant-based reconstruction have led to
a modiﬁed surgical approach with a delayed immediate
reconstruction. A skin-sparing mastectomy can be undertaken initially with placement of a temporary tissue
expander that acts as scaﬀolding for the skin ﬂaps.
Chest-wall irradiation can then be given and deﬁnitive
reconstruction undertaken later. The viability of the
native mastectomy ﬂaps after radiation causes concern,
and it might be preferable to proceed with immediate
reconstruction with a latissimus-dorsi ﬂap and implant
for all patients and undertake implant exchange if and
when required. An extended autologous latissimus-dorsi
ﬂap is not necessarily more tolerant of radiotherapy, and
substantial donor-site morbidity occurs. However, delayed
immediate reconstruction is a method that can potentially
preserve the aesthetic beneﬁts of immediate breast
reconstruction with preservation of the three-dimensional
skin envelope and more accurate targeting of tangential
radiotherapy beams.
Methods for accurately staging the axilla continue to
evolve, but remain dominated by sentinel-lymph-node
biopsy, which is now widely practised and accepted as a
standard of care. Dual labelling techniques with blue dye
and isotope are associated with a shorter learning curve
and optimum performance indicators such as rates of
identiﬁcation (>90%) and false negativity (5–10%).65 Blue
dye-assisted node sampling removes three to four blue
and palpably suspicious nodes and can be a pragmatic and
cost-eﬀective method when radioisotope facilities are
unavailable.66 However, this method is associated with a
higher false negative rate and lacks the reassurance
provided by the absence of any residual radioactivity
within the axilla. Results from the largest sentinel lymph
node biopsy trial show an overall false negative rate of
9·8%, with higher rates when only one sentinel node is
removed rather than two to three nodes.67 Completion
axillary-lymph-node dissection is recommended for all
patients with either micrometastatic or macrometastatic
deposits in the sentinel lymph node.65 The chance of
non-sentinel lymph-node involvement is related to the
volume of disease in the sentinel node, but nomograms
devised for estimation of this involvement are diﬃcult to

reliably apply in practice and are less accurate when the
predicted incidence of non-sentinel lymph-node positivity
is low. For some patients, the risk to beneﬁt ratio for
detection of positive cases of non-sentinel lymph nodes
might not justify any delayed procedure. Low rates of
axillary relapse are unlikely to translate into any meaningful
reduction in long-term survival in an older group of
patients with smaller non-high-grade tumours.69 Methods
for intraoperative assessment of sentinel lymph nodes
obviate the need for a delayed axillary-lymph-node
dissection, but detection of micrometastases with either
touch imprint cytology or frozen section is problematic.
New techniques based on reverse-transcriptase PCR can
potentially overcome diﬃculties of limited node sampling
and operating parameters set at a threshold for detection
of metastases greater than 0·2 mm in size but not isolated
tumour cells (≤0·2 mm).70 Real-time PCR might allow
quantitation and diﬀerentiation between macrometastases
and micrometastases.
Rates of clinical regional recurrence in patients with
negative sentinel-lymph-node biopsy who have not
proceeded to axillary-lymph-node dissection range
from 0 to 1·4%, with fairly short follow-up of 3 years or
less.71 Any residual disease within the axillary nodes will
be low volume, and longer follow-up might be needed for
any clinical manifestation of regional recurrence. Kujit
and Roumen72 report an actuarial rate of 5% at a median
follow-up of 6·5 years, predicting that up to 10% of
patients might eventually develop isolated axillary
recurrence after a negative sentinel-lymph-node biopsy.

Radiotherapy
Long-term follow-up of breast-conservation trials conﬁrm
signiﬁcantly increased rates of local relapse when
radiotherapy is omitted.46,73 However, rates of IBTR are
acceptable when breast-conservation surgery is combined
with whole-breast irradiation, usually delivered via
conventional tangential breast ﬁelds at a total dose of
46–50 Gy in 25 fractions over 5 weeks with an optional
booster dose (10–20 Gy). Within the NSABP B-06 trial,
39·2% of patients undergoing wide local excision only
had developed local recurrence at 20 years’ follow-up
compared with 14·3% for those receiving radiotherapy
after lumpectomy (p<0·001).46 Moreover, cosmetic results
are satisfactory when neither the volume of breast tissue
excised or the radiation fraction size are excessive.56 A
group of patients for whom rates of IBTR are not further
reduced by radiotherapy compared with observation or
tamoxifen therapy alone has not been deﬁned.74–76
Omission of radiotherapy should be cautioned at present
since it can lead to rates of IBTR approaching 30% for
small tumours of favourable grade, and local control does
aﬀect overall survival.49 Older women beneﬁt in terms of
breast-cancer-speciﬁc survival from radiotherapy after
breast-conservation surgery, and tamoxifen alone cannot
substitute for radiotherapy. Comorbidities can otherwise
reduce life expectancy for some older women for whom


any additional local control (3–6% risk absolute reduction)
from radiotherapy might not be clinically signiﬁcant.77,78
A group of techniques has been developed—accelerated
partial-breast irradiation—that decrease the volume of
breast tissue irradiated and the duration of treatment.
More than three-quarters of true breast recurrences occur
at the site of lumpectomy, and whole-breast irradiation
might be unnecessary. These techniques are focused on
the tumour bed and a zone of surrounding tissue of
variable depth. The advent of CT-based treatment planning
kept exposure of normal tissues to a minimum and helped
radiotherapists cope with the challenges resulting from
the peculiar shape of the breast and contiguity of important
surrounding structures (eg, heart and lungs). Computer
technology assisted with placement of multiplanar
interstitial catheter implants for brachytherapy after
lumpectomy. Treatment was aimed at the tumour bed and
a margin of tissue to a depth of 1–2 cm. This technique
allowed radiotherapy (34 Gy) to be completed within 1 week
rather than 5 or 6 weeks. Single institution series with
more than 5 years of follow-up show rates of local control
to be similar to whole-breast irradiation for matched and
appropriately selected subsets of patients.79–81 Despite a US
multicentre trial conﬁrming reproducibility of these
favourable results across institutions, the perceived
complexity of brachytherapy detracted from its popularity
and it remains available in only a few centres worldwide.82
Two further techniques of accelerated partial-breast
irradiation have been pioneered: intraoperative
radiotherapy and MammoSite. Intraoperative radiotherapy
delivers a high dose of radiation as one fraction at the
time of surgery, allowing precise application of radiation
dose to the target area to eliminate tumour foci around
the surgical bed. It potentially intensiﬁes the tumour kill
eﬀect of surgery and radiotherapy, although some are
concerned about the radiobiological equivalence of one
dose of intraoperative radiotherapy (21 Gy) compared with
conventional whole-breast irradiation. This concern
applies particularly to the low-energy X-ray source (50 kV)
used in the TARGIT trial83 compared with electron beam
therapy (electron intraoperative therapy)84 for which depth
of penetration is restricted. However, mathematical and
laboratory models suggest that TARGIT might be better
than conventional therapy,85,86 and initial clinical results
are encouraging.83 Intraoperative radiotherapy facilitates
an integrated approach to the multidisciplinary treatment
of cancer, but requires specialised equipment and for
electron intraoperative therapy a dedicated suite. An
alternative technique of brachytherapy is given via a
double lumen balloon catheter (MammoSite) placed
within the surgical cavity.87 This device delivers a total
dose of 34 Gy in ten fractions (via a high-dose rate remote
afterloader) and is now a common method of accelerated
partial-breast irradiation, using equipment already
present in many centres. Preliminary results with 5 years’
follow-up show low rates of local recurrence (0–6%) and
good to excellent cosmetic results in 80% of patients.88,89

Three-dimesional conformal radiotherapy is a form of
accelerated partial-breast irradiation that uses an
external beam to treat smaller volumes than whole-breast
irradiation does. Despite being non-invasive, achieving
high levels of conformality is diﬃcult.90,91 The related
technique of intensity-modulated radiotherapy delivers
conformal dose distributions and improves homogeneity.92 The combined NSABP B-39/RTOG 0413 trial
incorporates three techniques for accelerated partialbreast irradiation (three-dimensional conformal, interstitial brachytherapy, and MammoSite) and aims to
assess these techniques in comparison with whole-breast
irradiation with primary endpoints of local recurrence,
disease-free survival, and overall survival.93 The START
trial has assessed accelerated hypofractionated
whole-breast irradiation and showed that patients given
a lower overall radiotherapy dose in fewer, larger
fractions have similar local control and fewer adverse
side-eﬀects than does a dose of 50 Gy in a standard
5-week schedule. This ﬁnding supports hypofractionation
as a safe and eﬀective approach, but long-term follow-up
is required to assess local control and late toxic eﬀects.94
Radiotherapy after mastectomy encompasses irradiation
of the chest wall and skin together with regional lymph
nodes. The indications for this treatment continue to
evolve, but all trials have shown that it reduces the
proportional risk of local failure by two-thirds to
three-quarters of patients, including those with tumours
larger than 5 cm and four or more positive axillary lymph
nodes. However, data for the beneﬁt of postmastectomy
radiotherapy in terms of overall survival are conﬂicting; an
overview by the EBCTCG conﬁrms that postmastectomy
radiotherapy in node-positive women results in an absolute
survival gain at 15 years.49 Although postmastectomy
radiotherapy reduced rates of local relapse in node-negative
patients, mortality was not reduced. In the Danish and
British Columbia trials of postmastectomy radiotherapy in
premenopausal node-positive women receiving chemotherapy,61,62 the proportional survival beneﬁts were similar
for patients with one to three and four or more positive
nodes. However, some aspects of trial design were
controversial and any survival advantage within the
intermediate-risk groups (one–three nodes positive) could
be masked by toxic eﬀects from the radiotherapy. New
radiation techniques using tangential ﬁelds minimise
cardiotoxicity, as do methods such as intensity-modulated
radiotherapy.95 The SUPREMO trial is assessing whether
modern chemotherapy regimens and postmastectomy
radiotherapy can lead to overall-survival improvements in
this intermediate-risk group.

Adjuvant systemic therapies
Incorporation of adjuvant systemic therapies into the
multidisciplinary management of breast cancer has led
to improvements in rates of disease-free and overall
survival.97,98 The indication for adjuvant systemic therapy
after deﬁnitive surgery is based on established prognostic


factors, including age, comorbidities, axillary-lymph-node
involvement, tumour size, and tumour grade.99 In
addition to these well established clinicopathological
factors, molecular tests can assess the estimated risk of
recurrence in patients with early-stage breast cancer and
identify distinct biological classes of tumour. Three
prognostic tests have been approved for clinical
application in the USA:100 Oncotype DX, MammaPrint,
and H/I, which are based on a 21-gene proﬁle, a 70-gene
proﬁle, and expression of the HOXB13/IL17BR genes,
respectively. The Oncotype DX and HOXB13-IL17BR
assays measure gene expression with reverse-transcriptase
PCR and the MammaPrint assay uses complementary
DNA microarray technology. One of the advantages of
reverse-transcriptase PCR is that gene expression can be
measured in formalin-ﬁxed paraﬃn-embedded tumour
tissue, whereas the microarrays need fresh frozen tissue.
Although prognostic tests provide information about risk
of recurrence and death, predictive markers are needed
to select the optimum therapy for individual patients.
The best characterised molecular predictive markers are
the oestrogen receptor, the progesterone receptor, and
the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2).101
The responsiveness of breast tumours to hormonal
manipulation provides a unique therapeutic opportunity
in the form of targeted treatment. The antioestrogen
tamoxifen confers a proportional reduction in mortality of
26% and up to 47% reduction in local recurrence at
10 years’ follow up, with beneﬁt conﬁned to oestrogenreceptor-positive tumours.98 Tamoxifen is eﬀective in both
premenopausal and postmenopausal women, although
premenopausal women are eligible for ovarian suppression
with either luteinising hormone-releasing hormone
analogues or laparoscopic oophorectomy when disease is
hormone responsive.102 An advantage of luteinising
hormone-releasing hormone agonists is their potentially
reversible eﬀects on cessation of treatment. Whether
ovarian suppression can provide an alternative to chemotherapy in patients with oestrogen-receptor-positive
disease, and whether luteinising hormone-releasing
hormone agonists confer any additional beneﬁt when combined with standard treatments, is being investigated.
The aromatase inhibitors represent an important
advance in endocrine therapy of breast cancer. The oral
agents anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane are of
comparable antitumour eﬃcacy and are potentially
interchangeable, although long-term data for side-eﬀect
proﬁles must be obtained before deﬁnitive pronouncements on clinical use. The American Society of Clinical
Oncology Technology Assessment recommends that
adjuvant hormonal therapy for postmenopausal women
should include an aromatase inhibitor prescribed either
as initial therapy or sequenced after tamoxifen for
2–3 years’ (early switch) or 5 years’ duration.103 The largest
study of adjuvant aromatase inhibitors showed a
continuing divergence of the curves for disease-free
survival at 68 months’ follow-up, with evidence of a


carry-over eﬀect and a reduction in time to distant
recurrence favouring anastrozole.104 The absolute beneﬁt
for time to recurrence has increased from 2·8% at 5 years
to 4·8% at 100 months. This head-to-head comparison of
tamoxifen versus anastrozole shows no diﬀerence in
overall survival, although there is a non-signiﬁcant trend
for improved breast-cancer-speciﬁc survival in the latest
analysis.105 The fairly good prognostic parameters might
ultimately obscure translation into a signiﬁcant beneﬁt for
this endpoint.
The IES trial is the only adjuvant study to show an
overall-survival advantage for use of an aromatase
inhibitor within the conventional 5-year treatment span.107
These results, together with a meta-analysis of the
Austrian (ABCSG 8/ARNO 95) and Italian (ITA) studies,
support early sequencing with a switch to an aromatase
inhibitor after 2–3 years of tamoxifen108 as an eﬃcacious
approach, with improvement in overall survival for
oestrogen-receptor-positive patients. The proportional
risk reductions for disease-free survival are greater within
the early switch than in head-to-head comparisons of
tamoxifen and an aromatase inhibitor. Although interim
results of the BIG 1-98 study109 showed a disease-free
survival beneﬁt for 5 years of letrozole compared with
5 years of tamoxifen, deﬁnitive results of this study have
not shown a clear advantage from an early switch policy
in terms of recurrence rates compared with 5 years of an
aromatase inhibitor.110 At a median follow-up of
72 months, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in diseasefree survival for 5 years of letrozole compared with either
of the switch groups. However, pair-wise comparisons
suggested a minor beneﬁt for letrozole (5 years) compared
with tamoxifen for 2 years followed by letrozole for
3 years. The inverse sequence of tamoxifen after 2 years
of letrozole was equivalent to monotherapy, and patient
cross-over from tamoxifen to letrozole precluded any
updated comparison of the monotherapy groups.
On the basis of these data, some authorities recommend
that patients at greatest risk of relapse might beneﬁt most
from an upfront aromatase inhibitor, whereas those with
lower hazard rates for relapse might be best treated with
an early-switch regimen involving tamoxifen for 2–3 years
followed by an aromatase inhibitor for a total duration of
5 years. Although results of the BIG 1-98 study show
greatest beneﬁt from aromatase inhibitors for node-positive
patients, the converse is true for the ATAC study.105
Moreover, high-grade tumours derive no additional beneﬁt
from upfront aromatase inhibitors, and no conclusive
evidence supports HER2 status as being predictive of
response to aromatase inhibitors. Beneﬁts in terms of
disease-free and overall survival must be balanced against
long-term adverse eﬀects on bone health, cognitive
function, and cost. Some patients at very low risk of relapse
might derive minimal additional beneﬁt from incorporation
of an aromatase inhibitor into their treatment schedule
and should receive tamoxifen only. Breast-cancer patients
remain at chronic risk of relapse, and aromatase inhibitors


oﬀer the opportunity for extended adjuvant therapy beyond
5 years with use of an agent with a diﬀerent mechanism of
action. In the MA-17 trial of extended adjuvant treatment,111
letrozole therapy signiﬁcantly improved disease-free survival compared with placebo after completion of 5-years’
standard tamoxifen treatment in node-positive patients.
Adjuvant chemotherapy improves rates of disease-free
and overall survival for patients with early-stage breast
cancer irrespective of nodal status.112 US guidelines
recommend adjuvant chemotherapy for healthy patients
with axillary-node involvement and for node-negative
disease when tumours are larger than 1 cm or in the
presence of other adverse prognosticators (eg, age
<35 years, negative oestrogen-receptor or progesteronereceptor status, high-grade tumour).113 All patients within
a subgroup are assumed to derive similar beneﬁt from
chemotherapy, but many are overtreated and do not have
micrometastatic disease at presentation. Identiﬁcation of
patients with distant microscopic spread is particularly
relevant in patients with node-negative, oestrogen-receptor

or progesterone-receptor-positive breast cancer. Adjuvant
endocrine therapy is highly eﬀective in such cases and
the contribution of chemotherapy not well deﬁned. The
prognostic and predictive roles of the Oncotype DX assay
were assessed in archival tissue from treated nodenegative, oestrogen-receptor-positive tumours. Tamoxifen
was most eﬀective when the recurrence score was
low (≤18),114 whereas patients whose primary tumours had
a high (≥31) recurrence score derived more beneﬁt from
adjuvant chemotherapy.
The 21-gene assay was also predictive of beneﬁt from
adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with node-positive
breast cancer. A US trial randomly assigned premenopausal women with node-positive, oestrogen-receptorpositive breast cancer to tamoxifen or cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, and ﬂuorouracil (CAF) before or concurrently
with tamoxifen. The sequential use of CAF followed by
tamoxifen maximised rates of disease-free survival.
However, when the Oncotype DX assay was applied to
archival primary tissue, only patients with a high
recurrence score beneﬁted from CAF chemotherapy.116 If
prospective clinical trials conﬁrm these data, we might be
able to spare patients with low-risk breast cancer from
undergoing chemotherapy, irrespective of the size of their
primary tumours and degree of nodal involvement.
Prognostic and predictive values of these molecular assays
are based on retrospective subset analyses;117 TAILORx is
a prospective trial that randomises patients with
oestrogen-receptor-positive node-negative breast cancer
with an intermediate recurrence score (11–25) to chemotherapy and hormonal therapy, or hormonal therapy
alone.
The anthracyclines and taxanes are considered the most
eﬀective chemotherapies in the adjuvant setting. The
taxanes (paclitaxel and docetaxel) have non-cross
resistance with conventional agents, and their mechanism
of action is to stabilise and prevent disaggregation of
microtubules with disruption of the mitotic spindle. A
randomised trial showed that four cycles of
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (AC) followed by four
cycles of paclitaxel improves survival compared with
AC alone in patients with node-positive breast cancer.119
Furthermore, giving AC and paclitaxel every 2 weeks
(so-called dose-dense approach) improves disease-free
survival compared with administration every 3 weeks.120
Two trials investigating the eﬃcacy of docetaxel in
node-positive patients using more intensive anthracycline
regimens noted signiﬁcant improvements in overall
survival for taxane-containing regimens.115,121 A large trial
randomised patients with node-positive breast cancer to
four cycles of AC followed by either paclitaxel every
3 weeks, weekly paclitaxel, docetaxel every 3 weeks, or
weekly docetaxel. Results showed that four cycles of AC
followed by one dose of paclitaxel every week for 12 weeks
improved overall survival.122 Whether six or eight cycles
are best, or four are suﬃcient, is unclear. Eﬀorts are
ongoing to identify gene-expression proﬁles that would


help select patients for speciﬁc chemotherapies. A
popular combination is 5-ﬂuorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide (FEC)-docetaxel for patients with involvement of four or more nodes. Provisional results from the
TACT I trial suggest that adding four cycles of docetaxel
to one of two standard regimens containing antracycline
for unselected patients has little beneﬁt.124 Retrospective
studies indicate that aberrant HER2 expression could
correlate with beneﬁt from paclitaxel in the adjuvant
setting125 and that modulation of topoisomerase II gene
expression due to deletion or ampliﬁcation might predict
response to anthracycline-based chemotherapy.126 Coampliﬁcation of HER2 and the topoisomerase II amplicon
is associated with increased response rates to
anthracyclines.
Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is a monoclonal antibody
directed against the extracellular domain of HER2—a
tyrosine kinase involved in cell growth and proliferation.
Ampliﬁcation of the HER2 gene or otherwise
overexpression of the cell-surface protein has been
associated with a poor prognosis.127 The HER2 status of
the primary tumour or metastatic deposit should be
assessed in all patients with breast cancer with either
immunohistochemistry, ﬂuorescence in-situ hybridisation, or chromogenic in-situ hybridisation.128 If the tumour
is HER2 positive, the patient is a good candidate for
trastuzumab and for participation in clinical trials of
novel HER2-directed treatments.
In patients with HER2-positive early-stage breast cancer,
trastuzumab improves rates of disease-free and overall
survival independent of age, axillary node metastases, and
oestrogen-receptor or progesterone-receptor status.129–131
Two US trials reported a signiﬁcant reduction in risk of
recurrence of about 50% and showed an early survival
beneﬁt favouring trastuzumab at 2 years (p=0·015).129 The
European trial (HERA) showed similar reductions in risk
of recurrence but no overall-survival advantage.130 Within
the US trials, trastuzumab was given concurrently with
an anthracycline-based chemotherapy (AC followed by
paclitaxel/trastuzumab) and thereafter continued as
single agent therapy for 52 weeks; however, Herceptin
was prescribed only after completion of all chemotherapy
(any regimen of ≥four cycles) in the European trial. A
further international study (BCIRG 006) showed
signiﬁcant improvement in disease-free and overall
survival for the non-anthracycline regimen TCH (docetaxel,
carboplatin, and trastuzumab) compared with AC-T
(doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel)
and ﬁve-fold lower cardiotoxicity than with AC followed
by docetaxel/trastuzumab (AC-TH).131 The risk of cardiac
toxicity in the adjuvant setting ranges from 0·5% to 4%.132
Patients should undergo a baseline echocardiogram or
cardiac scan to assess left ventricular ejection fraction
before initiation of trastuzumab-based therapy. Serial
assessments of left ventricular ejection fraction are
recommended every 3 months while receiving trastuzumab with close follow-up in the ﬁrst 2 years after


completion of treatment. In the event of cardiac toxicity,
trastuzumab should be discontinued and left ventricular
ejection fraction re-assessed in 4 weeks, although this
decision should be made on an individual basis and
consider recurrence risk and pre-existing cardiac
morbidity.
Lapatinib (Tykerb) is a reversible small-molecule
tyrosine-kinase inhibitor directed against epidermal
growth factor receptor and HER2.133 The combination of
lapatinib and capecitabine improved rates of disease-free
survival compared with capecitabine alone in heavily
pretreated patients with metastatic breast cancer.134
Inhibition of the HER2 kinase seems an important target
for this type of molecule, because agents that target the
epidermal growth factor receptor kinase selectively
(eg, geﬁtinib and erlotinib) have shown insuﬃcient
eﬃcacy in unselected patients with metastatic breast
cancer.
Pertuzumab is a monoclonal antibody directed against
HER2 that prevents formation of heterodimers between
HER2 and other members of the HER family.135 The
binding sites of trastuzumab and pertuzumab localise to
diﬀerent domains of the HER2 protein. Preclinical studies
showed a synergistic interaction between pertuzumab and
trastuzumab, which is being explored.135 Overexpression
of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-IR) is
associated with a poor prognosis and resistance to several
drugs, including endocrine therapy and trastuzumab.136
Approaches to inhibit IGF-IR include the use of
monoclonal antibodies, small-molecule tyrosine-kinase
inhibitors, and IGF binding proteins. Intracellular
transduction pathways activated by growth factor receptors
such as HER2 and IGF-IR are potential therapeutic
targets, and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways have been well
characterised in breast-cancer cells.137 Clinical trials are
testing several inhibitors directed against diﬀerent aspects
of these signalling pathways. Postreceptor signalling
pathways are not linear but form complex networks with
much crosstalk. Multiple compensatory mechanisms exist
with some functional redundancy, and blocking one
protein (eg, mTOR) often leads to activation of more
proximal steps (eg, Akt) and potentially increased
proliferation.137 An approach for overcoming the
compensatory loops is to use a combination of inhibitors
and to target central signalling nodes that are crucial for
sustained growth-inhibitory eﬀects. Novel approaches
target not only the cancer cells but also the tumour
microenvironment and new vessel formation. Preclinical
and clinical studies have shown that blocking angiogenesis
improves the eﬃcacy of cytotoxic chemotherapy.
Bevacizumab is a recombinant, humanised monoclonal
antibody to vascular endothelial growth factor. A
phase II trial of trastuzumab and bevacizumab showed
that this combination was highly eﬀective in patients with
HER2 overexpressing metastatic breast cancer who had
failed previous therapies.138 Randomised clinical trials are


in progress to establish the safety and eﬃcacy of
bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy,
endocrine therapy, and trastuzumab in all subtypes of
breast cancer.

Primary systemic therapies
Primary systemic therapy, also known as neoadjuvant or
preoperative therapy, was initially used for management
of locally advanced breast cancers that could be rendered
technically operable. Neoadjuvant approaches have
increasingly been championed for treatment of operable
tumours, with the expectation of improved outcomes and
possible breast-conservation surgery.139,140 Downstaging
might reduce the requirement for mastectomy by up to
half, and breast-conservation surgery is more likely for
unifocal tumours located away from the nipple areolar
complex.141,142 Since the primary tumour remains in situ,
primary systemic therapy allows serial core biopsies to be
undertaken with monitoring of treatment eﬀects. Primary
systemic therapy constitutes a powerful in-vivo model
providing potential information about pathological and
molecular predictors of response and tumour biology,
which in conjunction with imaging parameters, enables
non-responders to be identiﬁed early and therapy
changed accordingly.
Early trials of primary systemic therapy compared the
same schedule of chemotherapy before or after standard
surgical treatment. The NSABP B-18 trial randomised
patients to four cycles of anthracycline-based chemotherapy
before or after surgery. Overall survival was equivalent for
both approaches, but patients receiving primary systemic
therapy were more likely to undergo breast-conservation
surgery.141,142 However, rates of IBTR were higher when
surgery followed rather than preceded chemotherapy, but
this diﬀerence did not reach statistical signiﬁcance (10·7%
vs 7·6%, p=0·12).142 Patients with a complete pathological
response to primary systemic therapy have improved
disease-free and overall survival, suggesting its use as a
surrogate marker for trials comparing diﬀerent schedules
of primary systemic therapy.141,143–145 The next generation of
trials of primary systemic therapy aimed to establish
whether diﬀerent preoperative regimens could improve
outcomes. In a small randomised trial, addition of
docetaxel to a preoperative schedule compared with
further anthracycline drugs doubled the complete
pathological response with lengthening of disease-free
and overall survival at 3 years.146 By contrast, NSABP B-27
conﬁrmed a doubling of the complete pathological
response with addition of four cycles of docetaxel to four
cycles of AC, but no improvement in overall survival.147
Nonetheless, NSABP B-27 did show improved outcomes
for patients who achieved a complete pathological
response irrespective of schedule received.147 Unlike
adjuvant therapy trials, fewer numbers of patients and
shorter follow-up are needed for assessment of primary
systemic therapy. The activity of trastuzumab in the
adjuvant setting has conﬁrmed the beneﬁts of this agent


when combined with chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant
setting; complete pathological response rate more than
doubled for combined therapy versus chemotherapy
alone.148 However, the potential for omission of surgical
resection in patients with a complete pathological response
remains limited in the absence of good clinico-radiopathological correlation and prospective identiﬁcation of
this subset with imaging and percutaneous biopsy.
Oestrogen-receptor-negative tumours have higher rates
of complete pathological response to primary chemotherapy than do hormone-sensitive tumours that exhibit
lower rates.147–150 Material from core biopsies or ﬁne-needle
aspirates can be processed for construction of DNA
microarrays, allowing comparison of expression proﬁles
between responders and non-responders.151,152 A metaanalysis of neoadjuvant versus adjuvant systemic therapy
for early-stage breast cancer shows that disease-free and
overall survival are comparable for the two schedules.153
Even if surgery causes a systemic perturbation that can
be oﬀset by induction chemotherapy, the assumption
that a modest shift in the timing of chemotherapy relative
to surgery would have any signiﬁcant clinical eﬀect is
perhaps naive.154 Moreover, increased rates of IBTR for
neoadjuvant regimens could suggest inadequate surgery
and cast doubt on the model of downstaging to allow
breast-conservation surgery.
By analogy with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, hormonal
treatment can be used preoperatively to downstage
tumours. Hormonal therapies are less toxic and potential
side-eﬀects of chemotherapy can be avoided in elderly
receptor-positive-patients and those with a poor performance status.155 Moreover, oestrogen-receptor-positive
patients are less likely to achieve a complete pathological
response with primary chemotherapy than oestrogenreceptor-negative patients are.147,149,150 Most studies relate to
postmenopausal women for whom the aromatase
inhibitors have consistently outperformed tamoxifen in
the neoadjuvant setting, when endpoints include response
rates and breast-conservation rates.156,157 The amount of
oestrogen-receptor expression is the main determinant of
response, and the optimum duration of therapy might be
longer than for chemotherapy.158 In a study of patients with
hormonally-sensitive locally-advanced and inoperable
breast cancer, letrozole given as a preoperative schedule for
4 months yielded signiﬁcantly better response rates than
did tamoxifen for a similar period and allowed a
signiﬁcantly higher rate of breast-conservation surgery.156
The IMPACT study randomised patients with operable
hormone-responsive breast cancer to 3 months of
anastrozole alone, tamoxifen alone, or a combination of
the two. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in objective clinical
response rates were recorded, but anastrozole was more
eﬀective than tamoxifen was in reducing Ki-67 expression
and downstaging tumours to allow breast-conservation
surgery according to surgeon assessment.157
Tumours do not necessarily shrink in a concentric
manner in response to chemotherapy. Even if no viable


cancer cells remain at the site of the original tumour
periphery, this zone might contain unstable epithelium
that is prone to malignant change.159 Furthermore,
tumour regression is diﬃcult to assess radiologically
even with MRI.160 Functional imaging techniques have a
potential role in assessment of disease extent before and
after chemotherapy and can be especially useful in early
assessment of tumour response as changes in
metabolism, cell proliferation, and vascularity precede
tumour regression.161
Primary systemic therapy can cause diﬀerential
downstaging between sentinel and non-sentinel lymph
nodes.162 Biopsy of sentinel lymph nodes undertaken
before chemotherapy will keep the risk of a false-negative
result to a minimum and ensure that decisions for
postmastectomy radiotherapy are based on accurate
nodal staging.163 However, there is no quantiﬁcation of
regional metastatic load, and some advocate biopsy of
sentinel lymph nodes after primary systemic therapy to
take advantage of nodal downstaging and avoidance of
axillary dissection in up to 40% of patients.162

Chemoprevention
Tamoxifen is a pioneering non-steroidal antioestrogen
whose primary action is to competitively antagonise
oestrogen at the cellular-receptor level.164 It has a proven
eﬃcacy in treatment of breast cancer over the past
30 years,165 with substantial increases in survival in
patients receiving long-term adjuvant therapy.166
Furthermore, patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen have
a 47% reduction of contralateral tumours.167 This accrual
of a vast clinical database, underpinned by data from
preclinical models and in-vitro studies,168 catalysed the
exploration of tamoxifen as a chemopreventive in
high-risk women.169 Several placebo-controlled chemoprevention trials of tamoxifen in high-risk premenopausal
and postmenopausal women have shown up to a
50% reduction in the cumulative incidence of both
invasive and non-invasive breast cancer, with primary
eﬀects conﬁned to oestrogen-receptor-positive disease.170,171
Moreover, recent data suggest that not only is tamoxifen
eﬀective during therapy, but also that chemoprevention
is enhanced for many years after treatment ends.171–173
This important observation shows the continuing
antitumour action of tamoxifen, which occurs at a time
when there are very few side-eﬀects from the drug. The
side-eﬀect proﬁle of tamoxifen and other potential agents
are crucial considerations in the chemopreventive setting
when the risk to beneﬁt ratio is shifted and healthy
women receive a pharmacological intervention for which
the beneﬁts are less tangible.
A modest increase in endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women has been well documented,171
although neither this increase nor a raised risk of
thromboembolism has been noted in premenopausal
women.171 Tamoxifen can result in hot ﬂushes when used
as adjuvant therapy in patients with breast cancer and is


a potential cause of non-compliance. This side-eﬀect is
especially pertinent in women who are considering use
of tamoxifen for chemoprevention, and a selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor often needs to be
co-prescribed. However, the latter can interfere with
conversion of tamoxifen to its active metabolite endoxifen
and should not be used;174 the occurrence of hot ﬂushes
can indicate eﬀective metabolism.175 Additionally,
mutations in CYP2D6 can impede conversion of
tamoxifen to endoxifen and might be relevant to patients
considering use of tamoxifen for chemoprevention.
Concerns over increased incidence of endometrial
cancer in women taking tamoxifen have led to
re-assessment of other non-steroidal antioestrogens with
attenuated uterotrophic activity in the rodent uterus.176
The recognition that non-steroidal antioestrogens such as
tamoxifen and raloxifene were selective oestrogen-receptor
modulators with duality of action created a new dimension
in therapeutics that is being exploited in chemoprevention
strategies. If a selective oestrogen-receptor modulator is
oestrogenic in bone but antioestrogenic in breast tissue,
then perhaps it could be used to prevent osteoporosis
with concomitant prophylaxis of breast cancer in postmenopausal women.177 Raloxifene has been successfully
tested for reduction of fractures in women at high risk for
osteoporosis178 and signiﬁcantly reduces the incidence
of oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer (77% risk
reduction) in patients receiving long-term raloxifene for
prevention of this disease.179 These encouraging ﬁndings
combined with the desire to minimise side-eﬀects
sporned the STAR trial:180 a head-to-head comparison of
tamoxifen and raloxifene as chemopreventive agents in
high-risk postmenopausal women. Initial results have
shown that raloxifene is equivalent to tamoxifen in
reducing the incidence of oestrogen-receptor-positive
breast cancer by 50%, but is less eﬀective in prevention of
non-invasive disease.180 Raloxifene might therefore
interfere with the progression of in-situ to invasive
disease, but have no eﬀect on premalignant to in-situ
transition. Raloxifene had a more favourable side-eﬀect
proﬁle than did tamoxifen, with marginally signiﬁcant
reductions of thromboembolic events, cataracts, lens
replacement, and endometrial cancer.
The panel summarises US recommendations for use
of selective oestrogen-receptor modulators on the basis
of clinical-trial evidence and approvals from the Food
and Drug Administration for risk reduction.171,181 Recommendations for treatment duration are a single pulse of
5 years. However, the long-term use of raloxifene to
prevent osteoporosis could mandate 10 or more years of
therapy, but the apparent carry-over eﬀect maintains the
antitumour eﬃcacy of raloxifene and tamoxifen beyond
the actual treatment period.180
Future research should be directed at elucidating the
mechanism of action of selective oestrogen-receptor
modulators in diﬀerent target tissues around the body. The
conﬁguration of the ligand/oestrogen receptor complex

Panel: US recommendations for use of selective
oestrogen-receptor modulators
Tamoxifen
Recommended for high-risk premenopausal women for
whom there is no signiﬁcantly increased risk of endometrial
cancer or blood clots
Raloxifene
Recommended for high-risk postmenopausal women for
whom there is no signiﬁcantly increased risk of endometrial
cancer
Raloxifene
Recommended for treatment and prevention of osteoporosis.
It reduces the risk of breast cancer with no increased risk of
endometrial cancer

determines the recruitment of co-activators and corepressors that bind to the external surface of the complex
and activate oestrogen-response elements.182 Individual
selective oestrogen-receptor modulators have a clinical
signature, with a range of structure-activity proﬁles that
are site speciﬁc and confer diﬀerential and non-correlative
mixed agonist or antagonist activity between species and
tissues. Finally, clinical trials are assessing aromatase
inhibitors in high-risk postmenopausal women as
chemopreventive agents. IBIS II is a multicentre trial183
that randomises healthy women at increased risk of breast
cancer to either anastrozole or placebo. These inhibitors
are associated with a greater reduction of contralateral
breast cancer in adjuvant trials than is tamoxifen. They
could potentially be combined with an luteinising
hormone-releasing hormone agonist as a chemopreventive strategy in premenopausal women, but concerns exist
about side-eﬀects of profound oestrogen deprivation, and
the optimum duration of therapy is unknown.

Conclusions
Despite an inexorable rise in the incidence of breast
cancer, improvements in treatments together with
screening have led to modest falls in mortality. Local
control of disease does aﬀect overall survival, and greater
attention to surgical margins and improved radiotherapy
techniques have reduced local recurrence after
breast-conservation surgery. Oncoplastic surgical techniques are being used selectively to enhance cosmetic
outcomes while satisfying oncological mandates. Longterm outcome is determined by the presence and
behaviour of distant micrometastases, which have to be
eﬀectively managed to achieve disease control if not
cure. Molecular proﬁling oﬀers the potential to provide
predictive information about individual tumour
response, which will guide clinical application of targeted
biological therapies and rationalise their integration with
conventional systemic treatments.
Conﬂicts of interest
We declare that we have no conﬂicts of interest.


