

From improved survival to potential cure in patients
with metastatic breast cancer

Future treatment strategies for metastatic breast cancer
curable or incurable

Abstract Current Japanese and American guidelines for
the surveillance of patients diagnosed with early stage
breast cancer recommend regular follow-up including
mammography, history, and physical examination; however, additional routine laboratory and imaging studies are
not recommended because there is no evidence of
improved clinical outcomes associated with the early
detection of distant metastasis. Metastatic breast cancer
(MBC) remains a largely incurable disease. The goals of
treatment for MBC are to maintain quality of life and
prolong survival. However, despite the emergence of new
concepts including oligometastases, cancer stem cells, and
the development of individualized therapies, clinical
management and treatment guidelines remain largely
unchanged. The future prospects for personalized management strategies for patients with MBC are described in
this review.

Introduction
Despite improvements in the early detection of breast
cancer and the development of more effective adjuvant
therapies, about 30% of patients with early disease will
relapse with distant metastases [1]. Metastatic breast cancer
(MBC) is a heterogeneous disease presenting a variety
of different clinical scenarios, ranging from a solitary


metastatic lesion to diffuse and multiple organ involvement. Although the survival of patients with MBC is
gradually improving, many physicians believe that the
disease remains largely incurable. The goals of treatment
for MBC are to prolong survival while maintaining a good
quality of life. However, in a minority of cases it is possible
to obtain long-term survival ([5 years) using standard
treatments.
Advances in our understanding of molecular biology are
providing new insights into the metastatic behavior of
breast cancer. The development of therapies specifically
tailored to target each of the molecular subtypes of breast
cancer offers new hope for improved survival for patients
with metastatic disease. Models of metastatic spread have
been developed to describe the complex interaction of
‘seed and soil’ factors involving tumor intravasation, circulation, extravasation, proliferation, angiogenesis [3], and
the microenvironment of the target tissue. Furthermore,
the cancer stem cell hypothesis has been proposed as a
possible explanation for treatment resistance and to highlight potential new targets for breast cancer therapies [5].
In this review the goals of treatment for MBC and the
hypothesis of tailoring treatment strategies according to
molecular subtype are discussed.

The biology of progression from ductal carcinoma
in situ to distant metastases
Breast cancer cells develop following a genetic change of
normal mammary epithelial cells. Progressive division of
cancer cells, from one to two, two to four, four to eight and
so on, and dissemination into the mammary duct culminates in the emergence of an independent malignant tumor.
If cancer cells are confined to the mammary ducts, the

breast cancer is defined as non-invasive ductal carcinoma
(DCIS). DCIS does not have metastatic potential because
the tumor cells are unable to penetrate the blood and
lymphatic vessels beyond the mammary ducts. However,
additional genetic changes occurring in DCIS cancer cells
may confer the ability to penetrate the basement membrane
of the mammary duct. Consequently, cancer cells with such
potential will move into the connective tissues surrounding
the mammary duct. It is possible that cancer cells readily
penetrate the blood and lymphatic vessels thus facilitating
dissemination to distant organs (Fig. 1).
Many authors have described the detection of cancer
cells in the blood and bone marrow of patients with early
cancer [6–13]. The approximate incidence of tumor cells is
20% in blood and 30% in marrow (Tables 1, 2). It has been
clearly demonstrated that the outcome of patients with
bone marrow involvement is worse than that achieved by
patients without detectable cancer cells in the bone marrow


However, it is conceivable that clinical metastases have
not occurred for all patients with detectable cancer cells in
the bone marrow based on the observation of a notable
discrepancy between the rates of bone marrow involvement
and clinical metastases. Some cancer cells in the bone
marrow may be eliminated by natural immunity, or by the
cytotoxic action of adjuvant therapy including chemotherapy and/or endocrine therapy, whereas others may be
quiescent. Furthermore, some cancer cells have the
potential of cancer stem cells, which are not sensitive to
adjuvant chemotherapy and may, therefore, survive for a
long time.

The clinical behavior of metastases according
to molecular subtype
It is important to consider the different clinical strategies
for the treatment of MBC according to molecular subtype
. There are four breast cancer subtypes defined by
hormone receptor (HR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) status: luminal A (HR positive and
HER2 negative); luminal B (HR positive and HER2 positive); HER2 (HR negative and HER2 positive); basal-like
(HR negative and HER2 negative). Estrogen receptor (ER)
and HER2 are predictive factors for endocrine therapy and
anti-HER2 therapy, respectively.
The four molecular subtypes exhibit different clinical
behaviors, such as timing and sites of recurrence. Previous
studies have demonstrated significant differences in the
timing of distant recurrence according to HR and HER2
status [14, 15]. ER-negative tumors are associated with
early relapse, whereas ER-positive tumors are associated
with a persistent risk of late relapse beyond 5 years from
diagnosis [14, 16]. Among 1,700 patients with primary
breast cancer treated at our institution, the first metastatic
event occurred at more than 5 years after surgery in 7.1%
of cases with ER-negative breast cancer compared with

23.6% of cases with ER-positive disease (Fig. 2). Furthermore, we have also observed cases with a disease-free
interval (DFI) of more than 10 years prior to the development of distant metastases. Almost all of those cases
with prolonged DFI presented with luminal A-type breast
cancer (ER positive and HER2 negative). Such observations raise the important question: where do the quiescent
cancer cells reside for more than 10 years?

Two hypotheses about the movement of cancer cells
from the primary breast to the metastatic site
Direct movement of cancer cells from primary
to metastatic sites (Fig. 3)

ER estrogen receptor, HER2 human epidermal growth factor receptor 2



with early breast cancer. The prognosis of patients
with CTCs is inferior to that of patients without detectable
circulating cancer cells. The evidence also demonstrates that circulating cancer cells are associated with
blood endothelial cells at distant organ sites, such as bone,
liver, and lung. Furthermore, cancer cells have been shown
to penetrate the connective tissue and subsequently proliferate at the target organs. Clinical metastases are
detectable at distant sites by radiological examination when
the metastatic tumor diameter is more than 5 mm. It is
hypothesized that such cancer cells moved directly from
the primary to the metastatic site. These cancer cells may
have a highly malignant potential and be resistant to
adjuvant therapy, including chemotherapy and targeted
therapy after surgery.
Indirect movement of cancer cells from primary
to metastatic sites 
Some primary cancer cells penetrate the blood vessel and
circulate to the bone marrow. Bone marrow provides a
favorable environment to protect cancer cells from external
threats, such as viruses and bacteria, and to supply sufficient nutrition to sustain proliferation. The bone marrow is
a common homing organ for MBC cells, independent of the
pattern of clinically overt metastasis. It is possible that
cancer cells have an ability to remain dormant for prolonged periods in the bone marrow. Such dormant cells
may have the potential of cancer stem cells and, following
stimulation by factors within the bone marrow, may exit
their dormant state and circulate to distant organs. Subsequently, clinical metastases may be detected by radiological examination following dissemination of cancer cells
from the bone marrow to distant organs.

Clinical experience and guidelines
for the treatment of MBC
Many investigators consider that MBC is incurable based
on historical data and current treatment guidelines. The
evidence-based, Japanese clinical guidelines for breast
cancer state that almost all patients with metastatic disease,
excluding those cases with local recurrence, are not cured
by systemic and local treatments. However, recently
we have observed long-term clinical complete remission
(CR) in patients with MBC treated with targeted therapy
regimens as first-line treatment. Nevertheless, many
patients obtaining clinical CR subsequently experience
disease progression and new metastases develop at other
sites. Despite achieving an initial response, most patients
develop progressive disease within 12–24 months. The
median survival of patients with endocrine non-responsive
or resistant MBC is 18–24 months, and fewer than 5% of
patients survive for 5 years. Rahman and colleagues 
showed that the outcome of patients obtaining clinical CR
with first-line therapy was better than for patients without
clinical CR. Therefore, clinical CR should be the goal of
first-line treatment for patients with MBC. It is notable that
the rate of clinical CR is much higher in patients with HER2
type than other molecular subtypes and this difference may
be due to the effective combination of chemotherapy and
targeted therapy. We have observed long-term clinical
CR in some patients treated with initial combination therapy comprising chemotherapy and trastuzumab followed by
maintenance trastuzumab monotherapy. Furthermore, we recently made the rare observation of long-term
clinical CR in a patient with triple-negative breast cancer, a
subtype which usually exhibits rapid progression

 (Case 1: 57 years old) Total mastectomy and axillary
dissection were performed for cancer of the left breast in 2004.
Pathological findings, invasive ductal carcinoma; N, 11/20 positive
nodes; ER, negative; PgR, negative; HER2, IHC 3?; Adjuvant
chemotherapy, cyclophosphamide–epirubicin–fluorouracil (CEF) followed by 50 -deoxy-5-fluorouridine (50 -DFUR; 600 mg/day). Left
supraclavicular lymph node metastasis was detected 7 months after


surgery. The patient was initially treated at the Aichi Cancer
Center with combination therapy comprising weekly paclitaxel plus
trastuzumab. Paclitaxel was stopped when the patient achieved
clinical CR after 3 months of treatment. Single-agent trastuzumab
was continued as maintenance therapy for more than 5 years. There is
no visual evidence of metastases assessed by positron emission
tomography (PET) 

recognized globally. This population comprising approximately 1–10% of newly diagnosed patients with stage IV
disease is potentially curable. In patients with
responsive disease, endocrine therapy and chemotherapy
are more effective in patients with a smaller disease burden
than in those with a greater tumor burden. A small but
important subset of patients with MBC, for example, those
with a solitary metastatic lesion, can achieve CR and longterm survival. A more aggressive and multidisciplinary
approach should be considered for those selected patients.

Surveillance guidelines for patients after surgery
Fig. 6 (Case 2: 36 years old) Partial mastectomy and axillary
dissection were performed for cancer of the left breast in October
2005. ER, negative; PgR, negative; HER2, negative. No adjuvant
therapy was administered. After 3 months, recurrence was detected in
the ipsilateral breast. The local recurrence was dissected and radiation
(50 Gy) was administered to allow conservation of the breast.
Multiple lung metastases and effusion affecting the right chest were
detected 1 year after initial treatment. The patient, with triplenegative MBC, was initially treated at the Aichi Cancer Center with
combination therapy comprising capecitabine and cyclophosphamide.
Cyclophosphamide was stopped when the patient achieved clinical
CR at 6 months. Capecitabine maintenance therapy was then
continued for more than 4 years. There is no visual evidence of
metastatic sites by chest X-ray

Guidelines for the treatment of MBC, such as those
published by the European School of Oncology (ESO)
[21], have not significantly changed in recent years despite
new data and emerging biological concepts.
The definition of oligometastasis, which is characterized
by solitary or few detectable metastatic lesions that are
usually limited to a single organ, has been widely


The current American Society of Clinical Oncology surveillance guidelines for patients diagnosed with early stage
breast cancer recommend regular follow-up with mammography, history, and physical examination. Additional
routine laboratory or imaging studies are not recommended
because there is no evidence of improved clinical outcomes
associated with the early detection of distant metastasis. However, these guidelines are based on data from
clinical trials performed 30 years ago and other studies that
are too old to reflect modern practice. Progress in
radiological examination techniques allows the very early
detection of distant metastases and many recently developed targeted therapies can achieve high response rates in
patients diagnosed with metastatic disease. Furthermore, it
is now recognized that breast cancer subtypes are associated with distinct patterns of metastatic spread and notable
differences in survival after relapse. Therefore, more
intensive postsurgical surveillance may be warranted to
improve early detection of distant metastases particularly
for patients with the high-risk molecular subtypes of early



breast cancer. In addition, the clinical benefit of early
detection of metastatic lesions should be investigated in a
prospective clinical trial.

Conclusion
In light of advances in molecular subtyping and targeted
therapy, we should consider individualized treatment strategies and more intensive surveillance for MBC. By adopting
strategies similar to those used in the management of early
breast cancer it may be realistic to achieve a cure in selected
patients with oligometastasis. Evidence appears to support
the hypothesis that the attainment of clinical CR with firstline treatment is the most important goal for patients with
MBC.
In the future, new strategies for MBC need to include
more effective targeted treatments to eradicate cancer stem
cells and non-stem cancer cells at tumor sites or harbored
within the bone marrow environment.
