

SPECIAL FEATURE

From improved survival to potential cure
in patients with metastatic breast cancer

Improvement of survival and prospect of cure in patients
with metastatic breast cancer


Abstract Patients with metastatic breast cancer have
traditionally been considered incurable with conventional
treatment. However, 5–10% of those patients survive more
than 5 years, and 2–5% survive more than 10 years. Recent
studies suggest that the survival of patients with metastatic
breast cancer has been slowly improving. In this review,
we examine the possible curative approach for a certain
group of patients with metastatic breast cancer. We identify
that patients most likely to benefit from such an aggressive
approach are young and have good performance status,
adequate body functional reserve, long disease-free interval
before recurrence, oligometastatic disease, and low systemic tumor load. An aggressive multidisciplinary
approach including both local treatment of macroscopic
disease and systemic treatment of microscopic disease can
result in prolonged disease control in certain patients with
metastatic breast cancer. Whether patients with prolonged
disease control are ‘‘cured’’ remains controversial.
Keywords Metastatic breast cancer  Chemotherapy 
Targeted therapy  Radiation therapy  Surgery



Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women in
the USA, where it is estimated that breast cancer will
account for 207,090 new cancer cases in 2010. In terms of
cancer-related mortality, breast cancer is ranked second
among women in the USA, where it is predicted to cause
39,840 deaths in 2010. The favorable survival outcome
in breast cancer is mainly due to two factors: detection
of disease at an early stage with screening mammography,
which is in common use, and advances in adjuvant
systemic treatment—including chemotherapy, hormone
therapy, and HER2-targeted therapy—that eliminates
micrometastases after definitive breast cancer surgery.
Unfortunately, it is estimated that about 30–50% of patients
with early to locally advanced breast cancer at diagnosis
have relapses despite the use of adjuvant systemic treatment after surgery. In addition, about 5–10% of patients
with breast cancer present with metastatic disease at
diagnosis.
Patients with metastatic disease at either initial diagnosis or relapse have traditionally been considered incurable
with conventional treatment. However, although the median survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer who
undergo treatment is only 24 months, 5–10% of those
patients survive more than 5 years, and 2–5% survive more
than 10 years. Furthermore, over the past decade, the
survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer has been
slowly improving. Giordano et al. analyzed the survival
data of 834 patients with metastatic recurrent breast cancer
treated between 1974 and 2000 at MD Anderson Cancer
Center. All patients were treated with anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. The results showed a trend toward an
association between later year of recurrence and improved
survival, with a 1% reduction in risk per year.


 found a similar survival improvement by year in 2,156
patients with metastatic recurrent breast cancer treated in
British Columbia between 1991 and 2001. Potential reasons for this improvement in survival among patients with
metastatic breast cancer are new systemic chemotherapy
agents; the identification of new cancer pathway targets
and development of new targeted therapeutic agents; and
advances in technology that make it possible to identify
patients with limited metastatic disease. Given the
observed improvement in survival, it is now well accepted
that certain patients with metastatic breast cancer could
eventually be considered ‘‘cured’’ of disease as a result of
the modern multidisciplinary treatment approach.



disease, systemic treatment is the main treatment in terms of
controlling the disease. The distantly involved macroscopic
disease in metastatic breast cancer traditionally precludes
the use of local treatment except local symptomatic control
such as pain control by radiation therapy. However, to
potentially cure a metastatic breast cancer, a similar multidisciplinary approach will have to be considered. This
potentially curative approach should include treatment of
both macroscopic disease (with surgery and/or radiation
therapy) and microscopic disease (with systemic chemotherapy and/or targeted therapy, including antiestrogen
therapy and anti-HER2 therapy).

Macroscopic treatment in metastatic breast cancer
Definition of ‘‘cure’’
Traditionally, cancer has been considered cured when the
disease is totally eliminated from the patient and the patient
has a normal life expectancy without the threat of recurrence. However, even with the most advanced radiologic imaging or laboratory monitoring methods, it is not
easy to be certain that cancer has been totally eliminated.
Cancer presents with both macroscopic and microscopic
disease. Even when macroscopic disease has been eliminated, microscopic disease can persist, as illustrated by the
fact that cancer can recur after years of remission. However, if microscopic disease has no influence on the
patient’s life expectancy or quality of life, then clinically
speaking, there is no difference between microscopic disease and true cure. If one follows a strict definition of cure,
a patient can be considered cured only when he or she has a
normal life span and dies without any evidence of either
macroscopic or microscopic disease (‘‘true cure’’). An
alternative definition of cure would be that all macroscopic
disease has been eliminated from the patient’s body and the
patient has a normal life expectancy with all possible
microscopic disease under control (‘‘clinical cure’’).
Whether this ‘‘clinical cure’’ is truly meaningful for
patients with metastatic breast cancer remains unknown.

Approach to potentially curative treatment
in metastatic breast cancer
In patients with early-stage or locally advanced breast cancer, treatment is generally delivered with curative intent, and
potentially curative treatment is multidisciplinary, involving
combinations of local treatment (surgery and/or radiation
therapy) and systemic treatment (chemotherapy and targeted
therapy, including antiestrogen therapy and anti-HER2
therapy). Because metastatic breast disease is basically a
systemic disease with both macroscopic and microscopic



Although systemic treatment is effective against both
macroscopic and microscopic disease, local treatment
eliminates macroscopic disease more rapidly than systemic
treatment, especially in patients with oligometastasis—that
is, if the patient has only a solitary metastasis or only a few
metastatic lesions, usually limited to a single organ. The
organs most commonly involved in metastatic breast cancer, in decreasing order of frequency, are bone, lung, liver,
and brain. Local treatment can eliminate all or most macroscopic disease so that systemic treatment can effectively
control or even eliminate microscopic disease.
Pulmonary metastasis
About 10–25% of patients with metastatic breast cancer
have lung involvement alone. 
reported on 1,581 patients treated with combination chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer, including 697
patients with lung or pleural metastases. The 5-year disease-free survival rate was only 2.4%. In contrast, studies
of pulmonary metastasectomy in patients with metastatic
breast cancer (1,058 patients total) show median survival
durations from 32 to 96.9 months and 5-year survival rates
from 27 to 80% (Table 1) [7–18]. The results of these
studies also suggested that in patients with a solitary pulmonary metastasis, complete versus incomplete metastasectomy and long disease-free interval before pulmonary
metastasis predicted better outcome.
Hepatic metastasis
Unlike liver involvement in metastatic colorectal cancer,
liver involvement in metastatic breast cancer is usually a
late development and signifies the end of the natural course
of disease. The prognosis associated with liver metastasis
in breast cancer is much worse than that associated with
liver metastasis in colorectal cancer. About half of patients




with metastatic breast cancer have liver involvement
during their disease course, and about 5–12% of patients
with metastatic breast cancer have liver involvement only.
Multiple studies of hepatic metastasectomy in metastatic
breast cancer (602 patients total) have been reported. The results showed median survival
durations from 15 to 63 months and 5-year survival rates
from 12 to 61%. The results also suggested that in patients
with a solitary hepatic metastasis, normal hepatic reserve
and long disease-free interval before hepatic metastasis
predicted better outcome.
Other local therapies for hepatic metastasis include
radiofrequency ablation, cryotherapy, percutaneous ethanol
injection, interstitial laser therapy, hepatic arterial infusion,
and transarterial chemoembolization. All of these local
therapies are well studied in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer with hepatic oligometastasis and in
patients with unresectable primary hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the use of nonsurgical local therapies in
patients with metastatic breast cancer with hepatic oligometastasis has been limited. In general,
the results with nonsurgical therapies are inferior to those
with hepatic metastasectomy. However, a combination of
nonsurgical local therapy and surgical resection may provide a better outcome than either approach alone.
Brain metastasis
Like hepatic metastasis, brain metastasis is a late event in
the natural course of breast cancer. The prognosis of breast
cancer patients with brain metastasis is poor; the prognosis is especially poor in patients with multiple lesions,





leptomeningeal involvement, or uncontrolled systemic
disease. About 10–16% of patients with metastatic breast
cancer have brain involvement during their disease course,
but fewer than 5% of patients with metastatic breast cancer
have brain involvement only.
Whole-brain irradiation is the standard of care for brain
metastasis, but for patients with a single brain metastasis,
surgical resection plus whole-brain irradiation provides
better median survival: 28 months compared with
14–16 months for patients treated with whole-brain irradiation alone. The strongest predictor of
better outcome is a lack of uncontrolled systemic disease.
Stereotactic radiosurgery has the advantage of avoiding
the general central nervous system toxic effects of wholebrain irradiation. Stereotactic radiosurgery can also be used
for brain lesions that are not easily accessible with standard
surgery or for lesions that recur after surgical resection or
whole-brain irradiation. Several studies have reported a
possible benefit in patients after stereotactic radiosurgery.
Bone is the most common organ involved in metastatic
breast cancer. Bone involvement usually signifies an
indolent course of disease. Patients with metastatic
breast cancer who have only bone or soft tissue involvement usually do much better than patients with involvement of other organs. About 20% of patients with
metastatic breast cancer present with bone involvement
only. Local radiation therapy is the standard of care,
especially if the bone metastasis produces significant
symptoms. However, patients with isolated sternal
involvement may benefit from aggressive surgical resection.




Primary breast tumor
About 5–10% of patients with breast cancer present with
metastatic disease at diagnosis. Because metastatic disease
represents disseminated disease, systemic therapy is the
most important component of therapy. However, there are
several potential advantages of removing the primary
tumor in metastatic breast cancer especially when the
metastatic disease can be well controlled. First, removing
the primary tumor eliminates the primary tumor as a
potential source of further metastasis. Second,
removing the primary tumor may remove the source of
growth factors that promote metastasis, which are believed


to originate from the primary tumor. Third, preclinical
data indicate that removing the primary tumor may restore
the immunocompetence of the host. Fourth,
removing the primary tumor may decrease the tumor load
significantly and render the subsequent systemic treatment
more effective. Multiple nonrandomized studies
including more than 10,000 patients have examined the
impact of removal of the primary breast tumor in patients
with breast cancer with metastatic disease at diagnosis
. The results revealed a significant survival advantage (hazard ratio for death
0.5–0.71). The most important prognostic factor is the
status of the surgical margins. Patients with a positive
margin after removal of the primary tumor will not benefit
from the procedure.
The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) is
currently conducting a randomized phase III trial (E2108
trial) of the value of early local therapy for the intact
primary tumor in patients with metastatic breast cancer.
Eligible patients will receive standard systemic therapy for
16 weeks. Those who have clinical response or stable
disease will be randomized into either continue systemic
therapy or early local therapy. The primary objective is to
evaluate whether early local therapy of intact primary
disease in patients with stage IV breast cancer whose disease does not progress during initial optimal systemic
therapy will result in prolonged survival, compared with
patients who continue on systemic therapy.

Microscopic treatment in metastatic breast cancer
Local treatment is used to eliminate macroscopic disease in
metastatic breast cancer with oligometastasis. However,

without systemic treatment, microscopic disease will
eventually become macroscopic disease. Therefore in
patients with metastatic breast cancer being treated with
curative intent, systemic treatment remains the most critical treatment component. The goal of the systemic treatment is either a total elimination of all disease (the
aforementioned ‘‘true cure’’) or continued suppression of
all disease (the aforementioned ‘‘clinical cure’’).
Currently, systemic treatment options in breast cancer
include cytotoxic chemotherapy, antiestrogen therapy, and
anti-HER2 therapy. With advances in the identification of
different targets in the breast cancer pathway, additional
target-specific therapies will become available.
Successful control of microscopic disease is the key to
potential cure in patients with metastatic breast cancer.
Greenberg et al showed that achievement of an initial
complete response after standard-dose chemotherapy was
associated with prolonged progression-free survival and
overall survival. In patients with chemotherapy-naı̈ve
metastatic breast cancer, standard-dose chemotherapy can
produce complete response rates of 15–19% and overall
response rates of 63–67%. The response typically lasts
about 12 months, but some patients (usually fewer than
5%) remain progression-free at 5 years after treatment. The
importance of systemic treatment in metastatic breast
cancer is also demonstrated by MD Anderson data presented by Rivera et al. Forty-five patients with metastatic breast cancer received six cycles of anthracyclinebased chemotherapy after undergoing local treatment to
render them free of macroscopic disease. Compared with
historical control patients who did not receive any chemotherapy after local treatment, the patients who received
chemotherapy after local treatment had significantly better
overall and disease-free survival.



High-dose chemotherapy with autologous
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

Selection of patients with metastatic breast cancer
for potentially curative treatment

Most of the chemotherapeutic agents used in cancer management have demonstrated a dose–response relationship.
Therefore, increasing the dose of chemotherapy might be
expected to result in more tumor cells being killed. However, normal cells in the body, such as bone marrow cells,
are also susceptible to the cytotoxic effects of high-dose
chemotherapy. To address this dilemma, patients can be
treated with high-dose chemotherapy in combination with
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. In this process,
hematopoietic stem cells are collected from the patient and
stored, high-dose chemotherapy is administered, and then
the previously collected hematopoietic stem cells are
infused back into the patient to restore the normal hematopoietic system.
Since the late 1990s, eight randomized trials of highdose chemotherapy with autologous hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation in metastatic breast cancer have been
described [92–100]. Results from seven of these trials
have already been published, and for one
trial, an updated report was also published after longer
follow-up [93]. Results for the remaining trial have only
been published in preliminary form [94]. Together, these
eight trials enrolled more than 1,000 patients. Six trials
showed a significant benefit in terms of progression-free
survival but not overall survival. One trial, the PEGASE
04 study, showed a significant benefit in terms of both
progression-free survival and overall survival. In 2008, Berry et al. [101] presented the first metaanalysis using individual data from six of the eight trials;
this analysis showed a significant benefit in terms of
progression-free survival and a trend toward benefit in
terms of overall survival. Subgroup analysis suggested
that young patients (less than 50 years old) and patients
with only soft tissue involvement will benefit from this
treatment.

Currently, potentially curative treatment is generally considered in patients with metastatic breast cancer only if the
disease is oligometastatic. Multiorgan involvement is
usually considered a contraindication to potentially curative treatment except in patients with indolent lesions, like
bone metastases, whose other sites of disease can be controlled locally with surgery and/or radiation.
Studies to date suggest that in addition to oligometastatic disease, there are several other features common to
the patients who are most likely to benefit from a potentially curative approach: young age, good performance
status, adequate body functional reserve, long disease-free
interval before recurrence (in patients who do not have
metastatic disease at presentation), and low systemic tumor
load.

Conclusion
The current data suggest that in certain patients with
metastatic breast cancer, an aggressive multidisciplinary
approach including both local treatment of macroscopic
disease and systemic treatment of microscopic disease can
result in prolonged disease control. Whether patients with
prolonged disease control are ‘‘cured’’ remains controversial. The patients most likely to benefit from such an
aggressive approach are young and have good performance
status, adequate body functional reserve, long disease-free
interval before recurrence, oligometastatic disease, and low
systemic tumor load. It is true that such patients have all of
the features of an indolent disease and possibly may do
well with or without an aggressive approach. Therefore, a
well-designed prospective randomized trial is needed to
determine the true benefit of such an aggressive curative
approach. Outside of such a trial, it is reasonable to offer



patients who meet the aforementioned criteria an aggressive multidisciplinary approach and the chance of cure. It is
important to realize that metastatic breast cancer is not
always a death sentence.

