

Abstract
Objectives: Although cognitive adaptation theory suggests that personal control acts as a stress
buﬀer when facing adversity, maladaptive outcomes might occur when control is disconﬁrmed.
The moderating eﬀect of disappointing news on the adaptiveness of personal control over cure
in women with breast cancer was examined and contrasted with the eﬀect on the adaptiveness
of general control over life. Additionally, the underlying beliefs and correlates of control over
cure were explored.
Methods: Women with newly diagnosed breast cancer were assessed after surgery
. For a sub-sample data before surgery and after the end of treatment were
available as well. Data were collected through questionnaires and face-to-face interviews. The
prescription of chemotherapy after surgery was used as an indicator of disappointing news.
Results: A chemotherapy prescription neither enhances nor limits the adaptiveness of
disease-speciﬁc or general control perceptions. Women reported that maintaining a positive
attitude, accepting treatment and adopting a healthy life style gave them a sense of control over
cure. Women with a strong sense of control over cure more often had invasive cancer, were
younger and were best characterized by high optimism and strong sense of control over life.
Conclusions: The ﬁndings add to our understanding of exaggerated control perceptions in
cancer patients treated with curative intent and do not give reason to assume that such
perceptions should be altered because of potentially maladaptive eﬀects. On the contrary, a
strong sense of control over the cure of breast cancer seems to reﬂect the capacity to adapt.


Introduction

Adaptiveness of control over cure

The chances of surviving cancer depend for a large
part on the characteristics of the tumor and the
eﬀectiveness of treatment. Consequently, there is
generally not much patients can do to personally
aﬀect cure. Seemingly contradictory, media accounts of cancer experiences often use language
with connotations to warfare or sports, such
as ‘ﬁghting’ or ‘defeating’ cancer. Moreover, in
various studies, cancer patients have reported
having a considerable degree of personal control
over disease progression, cure and recurrence.
Whether such exaggerated control beliefs are
adaptive at all times, is still subject to debate
. In the current study, we aim to examine the
adaptiveness and meaning of a sense of control
over the cure of breast cancer. The ﬁndings will add
to our theoretical understanding of exaggerated
control perceptions, as well as to our knowledge on
how to handle these perceptions in clinical practice.

Taylor’s cognitive adaptation theory posits that people
generally hold overly positive views about themselves,
which enhance their well being under normal as well
as stressful circumstances. Engaging in mildly
positive self-relevant distortions enables people to
maintain an optimistic outlook, self-esteem and a
sense of mastery when facing a threatening event. The
generation of a sense of personal control over
objectively uncontrollable events is an example of
such a distortion. Taylor argued that self-generated
control perceptions prevent helplessness and promote constructive thought and action. Supporting
cognitive adaptation theory, several studies have
demonstrated that patients with a strong sense of
control over their disease were better adjusted than
patients with weak control perceptions. Moreover, disease-speciﬁc control perceptions seem to be
particularly adaptive when threat is high or when the
disease is severe.


However, several researchers have also demonstrated maladaptive outcomes of disease-speciﬁc
control beliefs when these are not, or no longer,
conﬁrmed. For example, Christensen et al. reported that renal patients with a strong sense
of control over health reported more depressive
symptoms after a failed renal transplant than
patients with a low sense of control. Similarly,
Helgeson showed that disease-speciﬁc control
was maladaptive in cardiac patients, who experienced a new coronary event, whereas it was
adaptive in patients who did not.
Whether or not a belief in control is maladaptive
when confronted with a deterioration or a setback
might depend on the speciﬁcity of the belief. JanoﬀBulman theorized that only very speciﬁc, lower
order beliefs are vulnerable to disconﬁrmation,
whereas more general beliefs do not necessarily
have to be realistic to be adaptive, as they can draw
from many diﬀerent sources and are not easily
disconﬁrmed. In support of this assumption,
Helgeson and Fritz reported that a general
sense of control was adaptive in cardiac patients
who experienced a setback, whereas disease-speciﬁc
control was not. Additionally, Tomich and Helgeson
 showed that general positive beliefs after a ﬁrst
breast cancer diagnosis promoted well being after a
recurrence, whereas a belief in illness-speciﬁc control
did not.
Besides the study of Tomich and Helgeson,
no study has addressed the moderating eﬀect of a
deterioration or setback on the adaptiveness of
disease-speciﬁc personal control in women with
breast cancer. Two hypotheses can be formulated
regarding the direction of this eﬀect. First, based
on cognitive adaptation theory, personal control
might be a stress-buﬀering belief, i.e. personal
control might gain in importance after a setback.
Second, based on the assumption that the disconﬁrmation of control leads to maladaptive outcomes, personal control might turn out to be
disadvantageous when confronted with a setback.
A strong belief in personal control might prevent
women from mentally preparing for a disappointment and might provoke feelings of inadequacy
and responsibility. Based on Janoﬀ-Bulman’s
speciﬁcity hypothesis, this might hold true only for
the very speciﬁc belief in control over the cure of
cancer and not for more ﬂexible general beliefs in
control. The current longitudinal study aims to
gain more insight in the adaptiveness of speciﬁc
personal control over cure as opposed to the
adaptiveness of generic personal control over life
in women with breast cancer who are confronted
with a setback after surgery.



understand their meaning, it is important to
understand how women believe they can personally
exert control over cancer. Most studies that
examined cancer-speciﬁc control perceptions included written self-report measures with one or
more items about perceived personal control over
central illness aspects, such as the course, cure or
recurrence of disease. Many of these studies show
that patients perceive control over the disease, but
often it remains unclear how patients believe they
can exert control. Studies that did
examine perceived control strategies showed that
a sense of control can be based on very diﬀerent
beliefs, e.g. a belief in the eﬀectiveness of a healthy
life style, a positive attitude, prayer or compliance
with treatment. The adaptiveness of
control beliefs might depend on such underlying
beliefs. If patients believe in the inﬂuence of a
positive attitude on tumor growth, they might feel
responsible and incompetent when faced with a
setback. On the other hand, if patients perceive
control through compliance with treatment, they
might feel that they did everything they could. For
illustrative purposes, the beliefs underlying a sense
of control in our sample of newly diagnosed breast
cancer patients will be discussed.

Correlates of control over cure
To more fully understand the adaptiveness and
meaning of perceived control over the cure of
breast cancer, knowledge about the correlates of
such perceptions is needed as well. According to
cognitive adaptation theory, the generation of a
sense of control over the disease reﬂects an adaptive
response to stress. Based on this theory, it can be
expected that a sense of control over cancer is
associated with other adaptive personal resources,
such as optimism, a strong sense of control over life
in general, and low neuroticism. Besides an
indication of an adaptive response, a high sense
of control might also be motivated by a strong need
for personal control after a cancer diagnosis.
Cancer is characterized by high levels of uncertainty and ambiguity and, additionally, it poses a
substantial threat to life itself as well as to highly
valued goals in life. Findings from both
laboratory and ﬁeld studies suggest that under
such circumstances, when stress levels are high and
when important outcomes are at stake, people are
often inclined to overestimate their possibilities for
control. With this line of reasoning, the
strongest control perceptions would be expected in
patients facing the most threat. Findings of
Malcarne et al. [4] supported this notion, i.e.
patients with cancer in an advanced stage reported
the highest degree of control. Furthermore,
a strong dispositional need for control might
inspire exaggerated control perceptions after a
cancer diagnosis as well. 
demonstrated that only subjects with a high desire
for control displayed a belief in personal control
over chance outcomes. In sum, insight into the
proﬁle of patients with a strong sense of control
over cancer might allow for a more meaningful
conclusion about the adaptiveness and meaning of
such beliefs.

Study aims
First of all, this study aims to test the eﬀect of
a setback after surgery on the adaptiveness of
control over cure. Based on theory, it was
hypothesized that disappointing news after surgery
either enhances the adaptiveness of personal control over cure, as the situation poses more threat,
or reduces the adaptiveness of personal control
over cure, as the belief in personal inﬂuence is
disconﬁrmed. Moreover, to test Janoﬀ-Bulman’s
speciﬁcity hypothesis, we contrasted the
moderating eﬀect of disappointing news on the
adaptiveness of speciﬁc control over cure with its
eﬀect on the adaptiveness of generic control over
life. These hypotheses were tested longitudinally,
by examining the relation between personal control
pre-surgery (T0) and changes in both general and
cancer-speciﬁc psychological outcome measures
right after surgery  and 2 months after the
end of treatment. Second, to interpret the
ﬁndings, patients’ beliefs about the exertion of
personal control were explored. These underlying
beliefs were based on qualitative reports and serve
an illustrative purpose only. Third, the correlates of
cancer-speciﬁc control were examined by relating
control over cure to various patient characteristics.
Based on theory, it was hypothesized that a
strong sense of control over cure is related to
protective traits reﬂecting the capacity to adapt to
adversity (optimism, general control over life and
low neuroticism) or to  characteristics that
reﬂect the need for control (cancer stage, prescription of chemotherapy and desirability of control).
In addition, we explored the relations with several
demographics (educational level, religiosity and
age).

Methods
Procedure
Six hospitals in the northern part of the Netherlands
were involved in the recruitment of respondents. The study protocol was approved by the
Medical Ethical Committees. Women who were
referred to the hospital because of a suspicion of
breast cancer were invited to participate. Women
were eligible if they were 75 years old or
younger, did not have a serious psychiatric
disorder or a somatic disorder that implied hospital
admission, comprehended Dutch followed
the usual diagnostic protocol and did not have a
history of cancer. The present paper reports on the
data of women who were diagnosed with a
malignant breast tumor. All women were treated
with curative intent. The timing of assessments was
linked to meaningful events, i.e. diagnosis, surgery,
adjuvant treatment and end of treatment. To
avoid heterogeneity in the order of these events, 10
patients treated with neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
were excluded from the study. This paper reports
on three assessments: before surgery, shortly
after surgery and 2 months after the end of
complete treatment.

Sample
A total of 3093 women were invited to the study
prior to diagnosis, of whom 1226 gave informed
consent (40%), of whom 1094 were eligible. Of these
1094 women, 912 women were contacted within 6
weeks after diagnosis and conﬁrmed their initial
consent. Of these 912 women, 242 women were
diagnosed with breast cancer. To examine the
adaptiveness of personal control in the face of
setback, we limited our primary analyses to women
who completed all three assessments at the appropriate times. 1 To examine the correlates of
personal control over cure and the perceived ways to
exert control, we used data from all women who
completed the personal control over cure scale at T1
(n 5 228, of whom 224 were interviewed at home).
The sub-sample of 133 women was compared
with the regional population of women with breast
cancer not older than 75 and treated with surgery
, to examine sample representativeness. The mean age in the sub-sample
(M 5 57, SD 5 9, n 5 133) is similar to the mean age
of all newly diagnosed breast cancer patients in the
region (M 5 57, SD 5 11, n 5 1506). The distribution of TNM stages (9% in situ, 40% stage I, 42%
stage II, 9% stage III) resembles the distribution in
the regional sample as well (11% in situ, 39% stage
I, 36% stage II, 12% stage III, 1% stage IV). In the
sub-sample, 73% was treated with radiotherapy
and 40% was treated with chemotherapy, compared with 69% and 39%, respectively, regionally.
The larger sample  was largely similar to
the regional population as well.
As assessments were linked to events and
depended on prescribed treatment, time since
diagnosis at each assessment diﬀered between
subjects. In the sub-sample  the median
number of days since diagnosis was 11 days at T0,
52 days at T1 and 180 days at T2.


chemotherapy was necessary. Chemotherapy is
prescribed when prognostic characteristics are
relatively unfavorable (i.e. when the tumor is
larger, more aggressive or has spread to the lymph
nodes). In contrast to abstract information about
tumor size, tumor grade or node involvement, the
message that chemotherapy is necessary has concrete meaning for patients. For this reason, we
believe that the necessity of chemotherapy is the
most suitable indicator of bad news about disease
severity from the patient’s perspective.

Dispositional desirability of control over events in
life was assessed with the 20-item Desirability of
Control scale [28,39]. Alpha was 0.79 (T1; n 5 227).
Neuroticism was assessed with the ﬁve 12-item
subscales of the NEO-Five Factor Inventory
. Alpha was 0.87, (T1; n 5 227). Optimism
was assessed with the 6-item Life Orientation TestRevised. Alpha was 0.74 (T1; n 5 224). All
three instruments used a 5-point scale.

Instruments

Analysis

Personal control

Age was included as a confounder, as age was
negatively related to both the prescription of
chemotherapy and personal control, whereas positively to some of the psychological outcomes. First,
the cross-sectional Pearson correlations between
personal control over cure and life at baseline (T0)
and the outcome measures at all occasions were
examined for the full sample and for women who
were and who were not treated with chemotherapy,
controlling for age. To test the moderating eﬀect of
news after surgery on the adaptiveness of control
beliefs (aim 1), we performed hierarchical regression analyses for the four outcome measures at T1
and T2 separately, once including control over cure
at T0 and once with control over life at T0. As we
were interested in changes in the outcomes after the
communication of news after surgery, and wanted
to take into account pre-existing diﬀerences, the
baseline level of the outcome was entered in the
ﬁrst step. Age was entered in the second step, news
after surgery and personal control in the third and
fourth step, and the interaction between personal
control and news in the ﬁfth step. To avoid
multicollinearity, personal control was centered
around the mean [43]. The regression coeﬃcients of
the two ﬁnal steps will be presented. As in total 16
regression analyses were performed, the possibility
of ﬁnding eﬀects by chance was taken into account
when interpreting the results.
To examine women’s ideas about ways to exert
control over cure (aim 2), the answers to the
open-ended question that were recorded by the
interviewer were coded into categories by two
independent raters. The categories were based
on the analysis of an arbitrary selection of
20 interviews. When assigned codes diﬀered between
the two raters, the answer was discussed until
agreement was reached. Women often named more
than one category. To characterize women with a
strong sense of control over cure, results are
presented separately for patients within the highest
30% and the lowest 70% of scores on the 6-item
control over cure scale at T1. Diﬀerences were
examined by means of w2 tests.
Finally, we examined the Pearson correlations
between personal control over cure after surgery

The 6-item personal control scale of the Revised
Illness Perception Questionnaire [30,31] was revised to reﬂect personal control over cure (‘my
illness’ was replaced by ‘the cure of my breast
cancer’). An example item is: ‘The cure of my
breast cancer depends on me’. Alphas were 0.76
(T0; n 5 131) and 0.79 (T1; n 5 228). Personal
control over life was assessed with the 7-item
Mastery List [32] reﬂecting perceived personal
control over events and situations in life. An
example item is: ‘What happens to me in the future
mostly depends on me’. Alphas were 0.82 (T0;
n 5 132) and 0.86 (T1; n 5 227). Both instruments
used a 5-point Likert scale.
Generic psychological outcomes

Depressive symptoms were assessed with the
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale
[33,34]. Respondents rated how often they experienced each of 20 symptoms during the past week
on a 4-point scale. Alphas ranged from 0.86 to 0.92
(T0–T2; n 5 126–129). Anxiety was assessed with
the 6-item short version of the state scale of the
Spielberg State and Trait Anxiety Inventory
[35,36]. Respondents were asked to rate the degree
to which they were currently experiencing each
anxiety symptom on a 4-point scale. Alphas ranged
from 0.86 to 0.88 (T0–T2; n 5 130–132).
Cancer-specific psychological outcomes

Worries over cure were assessed with three items
based on the Cancer Worries Scale [37]. The
original items ask about worries over one’s chance
of having cancer and the inﬂuence of these
thoughts on mood and daily activities on a 4-point
scale. Instead, our revised items ask about worries
over the cure of breast cancer. Alphas ranged from
0.78 to 0.83 (T0–T2; n 5 132–133). Threat appraisal was assessed with ten items based on an item set
of Vinokur [38], asking about worries over the
impact of breast cancer on important life domains
(e.g. daily activities, romantic life and relationship
with friends) on a 4-point scale. Alphas ranged
from 0.88 to 0.89 (T0–T2; n 5 122–131).
Copyright r 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Possible correlates of control over cure

(T1) and age, dispositional desirability of control,
personal control over life, neuroticism and optimism. The relationships between personal control
over cure and educational level, religiosity, cancer
stage and the prescription of chemotherapy were
examined by the analyses of variance. We subsequently performed a multivariate regression analysis with all signiﬁcant correlates as predictors, to
examine which characteristics were uniquely
related to personal control over cure (aim 3).

Results
Adaptiveness of control over cure
In the total sample (Table 1), the negative relation
between a sense of control over cure at baseline
(T0) and the generic and cancer-speciﬁc outcomes
(T0–T2) was weak, but in most instances signiﬁcant. These cross-sectional correlations were generally more negative in women who were
prescribed chemotherapy (n 5 52; 39%) than in
women who were not (n 5 81; 61%). Noteworthy,
this diﬀerence was already present at T0, before the
communication of the necessity of chemotherapy.
In addition, a strong sense of control over life at
baseline (T0) was negatively related the outcomes
at all occasions. These correlations were generally
of medium size and did not seem to be dependent
on chemotherapy prescription.
The results of the longitudinal regression analyses are summarized in Table 2 (generic outcome
measures) and Table 3 (cancer-speciﬁc outcome
measures). Chemotherapy prescription after surgery predicted more threat appraisal and more
anxiety right after surgery (T1) and more worries
after the end of treatment (T2). Personal control

529

over cure did not have a main eﬀect on any of the
outcomes. The eﬀect of personal control over cure
on worries at T2 did, however, depend on the news
patients received, i.e. control over cure was
negatively related to worries in women who were
prescribed chemotherapy (b 5 0.20, p 5 0.10) and
positively in women who were not (b 5 0.11,
p 5 0.25). These simple slopes (main eﬀects) within
each group were however non-signiﬁcant. The
eﬀect of personal control over cure on all other
outcomes was independent of chemotherapy prescription. Personal control over life in general (T0)
predicted less anxiety and less threat appraisal at T2.
The eﬀect of personal control over life on
all outcomes was independent of chemotherapy
prescription.

Underlying beliefs of control over cure
Table 4 summarizes the response categories for the
open-ended question about ways to exert control
over cure after surgery (T1). One in three women
believed that a positive attitude (e.g. optimism,
humor and hopeful thoughts) had an eﬀect on the
cure of breast cancer. This belief was reported more
frequently by women with the strongest sense of
control. A third of the women indicated they could
aﬀect cure by adherence (e.g. agreeing with treatment and attending clinic visits). A belief in the
eﬀectiveness of adopting a healthy life style (e.g.
healthy diet, physical activity, fresh air and
avoiding stress) was more common among women
who reported a strong sense of control over cure.
One-third reported to have no or very little control
over the cure of breast cancer; logically this was
most common among women with a lower sense of
control. Yet, 37% of these women at the same time






Correlates of control over cure
There was a signiﬁcant relation between personal
control over cure (T1; n 5 228) and disease stage
(Table 5). Contrast tests showed that women with
cancer in stage 0 (in situ) reported a lower level of
Psycho-Oncology
0.23

control over cure than women with cancer in
higher stages (1–3). The level of personal control
over cure in women with cancer in stage 3 was
highest, but did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from that in
women with cancer in stage 1 or 2. Educational
level, religiosity and the prescription of chemotherapy were unrelated to personal control over cure.
Table 6 summarizes that there was a strong positive
correlation (Cohen’s dX0.8; rX0.37) between
personal control over cure and both personal
control over life and optimism. Furthermore,
women with a high sense of control over cure had
lower scores on neuroticism (moderate, Cohen’s
dX0.5, rX0.24), were younger and had a slightly
higher general desire for control (weak; Cohen’s
dX0.2, rX0.10).
The characteristics signiﬁcantly related to personal control over cure were entered simultaneously
in a multiple regression analysis. Three dummy
variables representing cancer stage were included,
with stage 3 as the reference category. The
complete set of characteristics explained 28% of
the variance in personal control over cure. Personal
control over life (b 5 0.35, po0.001), optimism
(b 5 0.25, po0.01), age (b 5 0.12, p 5 0.04) and
cancer stage 0 (b 5 0.18, p 5 0.02) were independently related to personal control over cure.

Discussion
Although cognitive adaptation theory suggests that
personal control acts as a stress buﬀer when faced
with a setback, other researchers argued that
maladaptive outcomes occur when an exaggerated
sense of control is disconﬁrmed. Combining
both possibilities, Janoﬀ-Bulman suggested that
general beliefs about the self are adaptive at all
times, whereas speciﬁc beliefs are vulnerable to
Copyright r 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.


disconﬁrmation. In the current study, we found no
evidence that disappointing news after surgery
either enhanced or reduced the adaptiveness of a
speciﬁc sense of control over the cure of breast
cancer or that of a general sense of control over life
(aim 1). Control over cure was often based on the
belief that a positive attitude promotes cure, which
is consistent with the trend in media portrayals
(aim 2). Other perceived ways to personally
inﬂuence cure were adherence to doctor’s prescriptions
and adopting a healthy life style. Furthermore, a
belief in personal control over cure appeared to be,
most of all, a reﬂection of the capacity to adapt
(aim 3). Women with a strong sense of control over
cure were best characterized by high optimism and
a strong sense of control over life, both key
resources in the cognitive adaptation framework.
Moreover, a strong sense of control over cure was
reported more often in women with invasive cancer
than in women with cancer in situ, which might
point to the role of a strong need for control.
Both general as well as cancer-speciﬁc personal
control perceptions were negatively related to the
outcomes, although these cross-sectional relations
were stronger for control over life than for control
over cure. Moreover, control over cure seems to be
more strongly related to the outcomes in women
Psycho-Oncology 
Personal control over the cure of breast cancer

who were prescribed chemotherapy than in women
who were not. The ﬁnding that this group
diﬀerence was already present before news was
delivered (T0), suggests that women already knew
good or bad news was about. However, women
who would receive a chemotherapy prescription
did not diﬀer from women who would not on any
of the psychological outcomes at baseline (T0).
Furthermore, they did respond to the actual news
with an increase in anxiety and threat appraisal (T1).
For this reason, it is hard to explain that diﬀerences in the strength of the relationship already
exist at T0. Nevertheless, the cross-sectional
correlations suggest a more adaptive eﬀect of
control over cure in women who (would) receive
bad news.
Although control perceptions were cross-sectionally related to the outcomes, only personal control
over life could longitudinally predict changes after
the delivery of good or bad news, i.e. women with a
strong sense of control over life reported less
anxiety and less worries 2 months after the end of
treatment, controlling for baseline. However, the
main ﬁnding of this study was that, except for a
weak interaction eﬀect on worries over cure at T2,
all longitudinal relationships between control and
the outcomes were independent of news after
surgery. Nevertheless, in line with the crosssectional ﬁndings, the longitudinal ﬁndings do
suggest a trend toward a more adaptive eﬀect of
personal control in women who were prescribed
chemotherapy than in women who were not. This
non-signiﬁcant trend supports the cognitive adaptation theory and seems to be more in line with
studies showing that the adaptiveness of a general
sense of control [44] and of realistic disease-speciﬁc
control perceptions increases with disease severity
[13–15] than with studies showing that the adaptiveness of unrealistic disease-speciﬁc control perceptions decreases after a setback [8,17].
There could be several explanations for our lack
of evidence for a longitudinal moderating eﬀect of
a chemotherapy prescription. First of all, possibly
not all patients interpreted the necessity of
chemotherapy as bad news. Doctors sometimes
present chemotherapy in a positive manner (i.e. as
a preventive measure). Moreover, although the
necessity of chemotherapy is an indicator of
relatively severe disease, chemotherapy also provides a way to inﬂuence cure. Perhaps the only true
bad news is an eventual recurrence of cancer or the
news that there are no more treatment options
available. However, in the early phase of the illness
trajectory, the communication of pathology results
and the treatment plan is the only instance of
feedback about prognosis. As a chemotherapy
prescription at this point in time did increase
anxiety and threat appraisal, it seems to be a
suitable indicator of bad news in this phase.
Nevertheless, future studies should examine how
Copyright r 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

I. Henselmans et al.

patients interpret a chemotherapy prescription and
how such perceptions aﬀect adjustment.
Second, assuming that the prescription of
chemotherapy can be considered bad news, the
eﬀect of this bad news on the adaptiveness of
personal control can be twofold, as is reﬂected in
our two opposing hypotheses. Possibly, the direction of the moderating eﬀect of bad news diﬀered
across individuals, which might have caused the
null ﬁnding at the group level. The direction of the
eﬀect might have depended on the beliefs underlying control over cure, which were shown to diﬀer
across patients in the current study. Our qualitative
data on underlying beliefs, based on open-ended
and unstructured interview questions, did however
not allow for the analysis of three-way interactions.
Finally, perhaps bad news aﬀects the adaptiveness of a sense of control only when control is
expressed in active eﬀorts to inﬂuence cure [45].
The period between diagnosis and surgery is too
short to assume that women actively attempted to
inﬂuence cure by for example alternative treatment
or diet. Future research might focus on the
adaptiveness of active eﬀorts to control cure.
Based on results from the face-to-face interview,
we can conclude that one in three women believed
that a positive attitude promotes the cure of breast
cancer. Noteworthy, our ﬁndings show that women
who belief in control over cure also have the most
optimistic attitude. Our ﬁndings are in line with
results of earlier studies [6,21]. For example, in
study of Stewart et al. [22] among breast cancer
survivors, 60% reported that a positive attitude
would prevent breast cancer from recurring.
Apparently, many women believe cancer remission
can be achieved by adopting a heroic stance toward
cancer, i.e. be keeping up hopes, positive thoughts
and a ﬁghting spirit. The beliefs underlying such a
heroic stance can be twofold [3]. The strong
formulation implies that mental states have a direct
impact on tumor growth, whereas the weak
formulation implies that mental states have an
indirect inﬂuence, through for example greater
persistence with treatment. More in-depth research
into the beliefs underlying a heroic stance might
be interesting, as such knowledge would tell us more
about the illusory character of such control beliefs.
Women with a strong sense of control over the
cure of breast cancer had various protective
characteristics. They were optimistic, had a strong
sense of control over life and had lower scores on
neuroticism. Furthermore, women with invasive
cancer reported higher levels of control over cure
than women with breast cancer in situ. This might
suggest that a strong need for control, created by
disease characteristics, enhances exaggerated control perceptions. However, personal control over
cure was only weakly related to the dispositional
need for control. Future research might focus on
the relationship between perceived personal control
Psycho-Oncology 

and the need for personal control based on
situational characteristics as well as on disposition.
The current study has several limitations. First
of all, many women were not able to complete the
assessment before surgery (T0) and, consequently,
we had to drop them from the primary analyses.
These women reported more depressive symptoms
at T1 than women with complete data, which
indicates the possibility of some bias. However,
there were no diﬀerences with respect to other
psychological outcomes at the various points in
time. Furthermore, the selected sub-sample of 133
women was shown to be rather representative of
the regional population of breast cancer patients.
Nevertheless, the ﬁnal sample was small, which
limited the power to detect small moderating eﬀects
of chemotherapy prescription. Second, based
on the current study, we can only draw conclusions
regarding the adaptiveness of personal control
over the cure of breast cancer in the early, curative
stage of the illness. Our study does not allow for
conclusions about the adaptiveness of such control
perceptions in case of cancer in a terminal stage.
In sum, the results of our study do not give
reason to assume that strong cancer-speciﬁc control perceptions in newly diagnosed patients treated
with curative intent should be altered because of
potentially maladaptive eﬀects. In contrast,
patients with the strongest control perceptions
might be those best able to adjust to a cancer
diagnosis and subsequent setbacks. These insights
might help clinical workers in deciding how to
respond to patients who report a strong sense of
personal control over the cure of the disease.

