
Breast cancer has surpassed lung cancer as the most common cause of cancer deaths, worldwide. Early breast cancers are
treatment sensitive and patients under standardized treatment have prolonged. Breast cancer treatment has signiﬁcantly
evolved from the conventional surgical approach and radiotherapy to local and systemic adjuvant therapies. Though localized
breast cancers are clinically manageable, distant recurrence is a cause of morbid concern. Adjuvant systemic therapy is effective
in both distant and local recurrences and hence gained signiﬁcant attention. Early breast cancer prognosis has greatly improved
in the past 3 decades with reduced mortality rates due to the widespread use of adjuvant therapy. It can markedly increase the
cure rate of breast cancers, and postoperative adjuvant therapy became a part of comprehensive breast cancer treatment.
Further research to understand the early breast cancer characteristics could expand the treatment modalities that can improve
the outcomes and survival beneﬁts of breast cancer patients.

Breast cancer has now overtaken lung cancer as the most
common malignancy worldwide, with high annual incidence
of 11.7% and the ﬁfth leading cause of cancer deaths
worldwide in 2020.1 Clinical presentation of breast cancer is
localized tumor in 61% of patients, 32% of patients show
regionally advanced tumor, and 7% show metastases.
Deeper understanding on clinical and pathogenic attributes of breast cancer has led to the evolution of breast
cancer treatment over the years resulting in de-escalation of
radical mastectomy and/or radiotherapy. Progress has been
achieved by increasing implementation of multimodal
treatment comprising chemotherapy, endocrine therapy,
targeted therapy, and immunotherapy.
Multiple clinical trials have shown decreased recurrence and
enhanced survival with adjuvant systemic chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, and anti-HER2 therapy in early breast cancer
patients. With wider treatment possibilities, women with breast
cancer who can receive sufﬁcient therapy now have a 90%

probability of being cured. Much importance has been directed
toward optimizing adjuvant systemic therapy approaches since it
has improved the survival outcomes of early breast cancer patients.5 In the current scenario, women with early breast cancer
can receive systemic treatment lasting beyond 10 years provided
a lower risk of toxicity.4 In this review, we discuss the latest
research progress on adjuvant therapy for early breast cancer
mainly including chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, targeted
therapy, bone-modifying drug therapy, and adjuvant intensive
therapy after neoadjuvant therapy. A summary of clinical outcomes of various research studies on different adjuvant therapies
in early breast cancer patients is listed in Table 1.


Cancer Control

Adjuvant Chemotherapy

Triple-Negative Breast Cancer

Chemotherapy plays an important role in the treatment of
breast cancer in all stages. Chemotherapy can prolong the
survival and improve the prognosis of early breast cancer.
However, adverse reactions and drug resistance caused by
chemotherapy are a cause of concern and need to be resolved. Anthracycline-containing adjuvant chemotherapy
regimen is often recommended for women with resected
node-positive or high-risk node-negative breast cancer.
Anthracyclines have been shown to be effective in several
large cohort studies. Improved disease-free survival (DFS)
and overall survival (OS) were observed in early breast
cancer patients by adding taxane to an anthracycline-based
regimen in the adjuvant setting.7 According to the National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), anthracyclinebased regimens have been the cornerstone of adjuvant
chemotherapy for the last 3 decades but are associated with
long-term cardiotoxicity. Thus, in order to prevent cardiotoxicities, non-anthracycline-containing regimens are
increasingly sought after for patients with early-stage breast
cancer.
The US Oncology Trial 9735 showed DFS (81% vs 75%)
and OS (87% vs 82%) rates as well as reduced cardiotoxicity
in early breast cancer patients treated with anthracycline-free
docetaxel with cyclophosphamide regimen compared to
anthracycline-containing epirubicin with cyclophosphamide
regimen. Similarly, TRYPHAENA trial also demonstrated
better outcomes with the addition of docetaxel–carboplatinbased neoadjuvant chemotherapy to dual HER2 blockade
regimen. About 58% of patients showed total pathological
complete response (pCR) and they were more likely to be
disease free at 3 years (HR = .27; 95% CI, .11–.64) with
better DFS (∼90%) and PFS rates (∼89%).10 However,
NATT trial demonstrated anthracycline-based chemotherapy
to be more beneﬁcial for patients with early breast cancer
than “anthracycline-free” chemotherapy. The pCR rates
were lower in patients treated with docetaxel plus cyclophosphamide (6.8%) than patients treated with docetaxel,
anthracycline, and cyclophosphamide (17.6%).
The results of an individual patient-level meta-analysis
by the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative
Group (EBCTCG) comparing anthracycline-based vs
anthracycline-free regimens conﬁrmed that anthracyclinebased chemotherapy, especially dose-dense regimens, can
lead to a favorable survival beneﬁt. It reduced the mortality
rate by 57% compared to 45% by anthracycline-free regimens in early breast cancer patients. Clinical management
of breast cancer with anthracycline is still controversial, and
accurately treating anthracycline-sensitive patients continues to remain as a challenge. Nevertheless, anthracyclines
are still preferable due to shorter treatment duration, less
patient visits, shorter duration of antiemetic usage, and
therefore became standard of care in early breast cancer
treatment.

Chemotherapy has long been the only effective treatment
strategy available for triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs)
commonly characterized by heterogeneity, aggressiveness,
and poor prognosis.14,15 Even though programmed cell death
1 (PD1), programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1), and poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor have been found
to be effective in the neoadjuvant phase, chemotherapy remains the fundamental treatment modality for TNBC.
Adjuvant chemotherapy for early TNBC emphasizes the
use of standardized chemotherapy regimens and development
for reasonable management of adverse reactions.
BGIRG005 trial studied AC-T (doxorubicin + cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel) vs TAC (docetaxel +
doxorubicin + cyclophosphamide) as adjuvant therapy for
early triple-negative breast cancer. There was no signiﬁcant
difference in DFS and OS in terms of efﬁcacy, but AC-T
showed signiﬁcantly higher hematological toxicity than the
combination therapy. Due to low tolerability and toxicity,
adjuvant chemotherapy with AC-T can be preferred in highrisk TNBC patients.16 In SYSUCC-001 trial, patients with
early triple-negative breast cancer who completed standardized adjuvant therapy were given capecitabine maintenance
therapy for 1 year. After a median follow-up of 56.5 months,
the 5-year DFS of capecitabine (82.8%) was signiﬁcantly
superior to that of the control group (73.0%). Therefore, the
choice of standard therapy followed by 1 year of capecitabine
therapy may reduce the risk of recurrence.Meta-analysis on
9 randomized clinical trials in TNBC patients treated with
combined capecitabine regimens in neoadjuvant and adjuvant
chemotherapy showed signiﬁcantly improved DFS (HR = .75;
95% CI; .65–.86; P < .001) and OS (HR = .63; 95% CI; .53–
.77; P < .001).15 Chemotherapy combined with immunotherapy has been implicated as neoadjuvant treatment for early
breast cancer and as salvage treatment for metastatic breast
cancer However, the optimal combination and management
of adverse events when using combination therapies are still
being explored and no studies have been published in early
TNBC adjuvant settings.

Hormone Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer
Hormone receptor (HR)-positive (ie, estrogen receptor (ER)and/or progesterone receptor (PR)-positive) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast
cancer contributes to 70% of breast cancer cases in the
Western countries. Only 15% of these breast cancer patients
develop recurrence in <10 years when treated only with adjuvant endocrine therapy. Adjuvant chemotherapy helps to
reduce the risk of recurrence of breast cancer in these patients.
This led the National Institutes of Health consensus recommend adjuvant chemotherapy for most patients which decreased the mortality of breast cancer patients.20 Given the low
relative risk of recurrence and partial chemotherapy effectives,





especially in patients with HER2-negative breast cancer,
which was found to be a viable alternative. Phase III
ELEGANT study is the ﬁrst prospective, randomized, openlabel clinical trial to compare the safety proﬁle of epirubicin
and cyclophosphamide (EC) with docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (TC). The study ﬁrst reported similar efﬁcacy results
of EC and TC with no signiﬁcant difference in survival,
providing favorable evidence for chemotherapy regimens in
patients with node-negative low-risk luminal breast cancer.
A meta-analysis of 37 298 patients from 26 clinical trials
included by the EBCTCG compared the efﬁcacies of dosedense and standard chemotherapy regimens. The latest
analysis of the data revealed that dose-dense regimen (every
2 weeks) containing taxanes could lower the recurrence rate
(24.0% vs 28.3%) and reduce breast cancer mortality (16.8%
vs 19.6%) as against the standard regimen (every 3 weeks).
Dose-dense chemotherapy could improve the long-term survival beneﬁt of patients with early high-risk breast cancer and
shorten the duration of treatment. Studies are required to
evaluate the usefulness of dose-dense chemotherapy approach
in HR-positive early breast cancer settings. Currently, dosedense chemotherapy has been incorporated into the domestic
and foreign guidelines as routine postoperative adjuvant
chemotherapy for high-risk patients. Notably, the dose-dense
regimen breaks the balance between efﬁcacy and safety to
some extent, and this trade-off puts higher demands on
clinicians.

HER2-Positive Breast Cancer
In recent years, a growing number of studies have begun to
explore whether anthracyclines can be avoided without affecting prognosis of breast cancer patients, considering their
high toxicity and adverse effects. This approach was ﬁrst
initiated in low-risk HER2-positive early breast cancer patients. The HERTC study exploring the TCH (docetaxel +
cyclophosphamide + trastuzumab) regimen in HER2-positive
early breast cancer patients found that 2-year DFS rate was
100% and 98.1% in axillary node-negative patients with tumor
diameters of <1 cm and 1.1–2.0 cm, respectively. This study
conﬁrms the efﬁcacy of TCH regimen as adjuvant therapy for
HER2-positive breast cancer patients.28 The single-arm APT
study explored the efﬁcacy and safety of adjuvant paclitaxel
plus TH in patients with node-negative, early HER2-positive
breast cancer with tumors smaller than 3 cm. Propensity-score
matching (PSM) showed that patients who received TH and
non-paclitaxel chemotherapy had similar invasive DFS
(IDFS) (96.5% vs 92.9%) and OS (99.3% vs 97.4%) as those
who received paclitaxel and TH, although the incidence of
adverse reactions was lower in the latter group.For the
purpose of reducing impact of adverse reactions on patients
and improve the quality of life, chemotherapy “subtraction”
on the premise of ensuring the efﬁcacy has gradually started to
show advantages.



Adjuvant Targeted Therapy
Adjuvant targeted therapy that targets molecular pathways
was used to reduce the risk of recurrence especially in HER2positive breast cancer patients.30 Approximately 20%–30% of
breast cancer tumors overexpress or amplify HER2.31 This
molecular subtype is highly aggressive and malignant and
contributes to high rates of metastasis and mortality.32 Anti
HER-2 monoclonal antibody TH was shown to improve DFS
(84%) and OS (92%) in HER2-positive early breast cancer
patients when used in combination with chemotherapy in
adjuvant settings.33 Earlier TH was the only anti-HER2 drug
available but in the past 20 years, landscape of HER2-targeted
drugs has been constantly evolving. This led to the emergence
of new drugs such as pertuzumab, lapatinib, trastuzumab
emtansine (T-DM1), and trastuzumab deruxtecan (DS8201)
that have signiﬁcantly improved the therapeutic effect and
prognosis of HER2-positive breast cancer patients.34
APHINITY study found that the addition of pertuzumab to
TH and chemotherapy decreases the recurrence rate (7.1% vs
8.7%, P = 0. 045) and prolongs the IDFS (94.1% vs 93.2%) in
early HER2-positive breast cancer patients.35 This study establishes the role of dual-targeted therapy in the standard of
care for HER2-positive breast cancers. A subsequent update
on the APHINITY study published the data of 8.4-year
follow-up that showed an OS hazard ratio (HR) of .83 (95%
CI: .68–1.02; P = .078) with an 8-year OS rate of 92.7% vs
92.0% for single-targeted vs dual-targeted therapy, respectively. The updated IDFS HR was .77 (95% CI: .66–.91), and
the node-positive (N+) cohort IDFS HR was .72 (95% CI: .60–
.87). Updated study results suggested that IDFS beneﬁt from
pertuzumab was maintained in HER2-positive early breast
cancer, while patients with node-positive breast cancer were
beneﬁted more from dual-targeted therapy.36
The ExteNET multi-center, randomized, double-blind
phase III clinical trial enrolled 2840 HER2-positive early
breast cancer patients treated with trastuzumab in combination
with neoadjuvant/adjuvant chemotherapy. Intensive adjuvant
therapy with neratinib initiated in HR-positive in ≤1 year
showed signiﬁcantly improved outcomes in terms of 5-year
IDFS (7.4%) and 8-year OS (9.1%) with fewer central nervous
system adverse events.
ATEMPT study enrolled 497 patients with stage I HER2positive breast cancer patients who were randomized to receive either the trastuzumab regimen or trastuzumab emtansine monotherapy for 1 year. The results indicated 1 year of
adjuvant trastuzumab emtansine was associated with excellent
3-year iDFS. The number of recurrent events was lower in the
trastuzumab emtansine group with a 3-year IDFS rate of
97.8% and relapse-free survival (RFS) rate of 99.2%. Although clinically relevant toxicities were not signiﬁcantly
reduced, it is suggested that adjuvant targeted therapy without
chemotherapy can serve as an alternative to taxane-based
trastuzumab regimen without compromising efﬁcacy.
With the advent of antibody drug conjugates, adjuvant



therapy options for treating early HER2-positive breast cancer
patients have become enriched.39 Evolution of HER2-targeted
therapies for patients with HER2-positive breast cancer is an
important milestone in breast cancer treatment and enables
clinicians to design more beneﬁcial personalized treatments.

Adjuvant Endocrine Therapy
HR-positive breast cancer is the most common subtype of breast
cancer mostly diagnosed with early-stage disease. Optimization
of adjuvant systemic therapy has the potential to exert a broad
impact on the treatment of HR-positive early breast cancer patients. Currently, adjuvant therapy for early-stage HR-positive
breast cancer includes endocrine therapy, with or without
chemotherapy.40,41 Endocrine therapy had long been recognized
as a powerful and important adjuvant treatment for women with
HR-positive early-stage breast cancer. In 1982, adjuvant tamoxifen given for 2 years was shown to reduce the risk of recurrence. Subsequently, several randomized clinical trial data
have established the beneﬁts of ovarian function suppression
(OFS), tamoxifen, and aromatase inhibitors (AIs) alone or in
combination with other agents. The survival beneﬁts of endocrine therapy for a minimum of 5 years in stage I through III preand postmenopausal women with HR-positive breast cancer
were further conﬁrmed by meta-analyses studies which assessed
multiple clinical trial data. In postmenopausal women, AIs were
shown to be more effective while in patients with higher-stage/
risk disease, prolonged adjuvant therapy for up to 10 years was
reported to be useful. Ovarian suppression plus an AI was shown
to be more beneﬁcial than tamoxifen in premenopausal women
with HR-positive breast cancer. Recent trials evaluating adjuvant
endocrine therapy with CDK-4/-6 inhibitors show marked survival beneﬁts in combination with endocrine therapy in high- and
intermediate-risk HR-positive early breast cancer patients.2,42
The development and clinical practice of endocrine therapy
has further enabled the improvement of clinical outcomes and
lowered the risk of relapse and mortality and also reduces the
burden of overtreatment in breast cancer patients.

HR-Positive/HER2-Negative Breast Cancer
Seventy percent of breast cancers belong to HR-positive and
human epidermal growth HER2-negative subtype at initial
diagnosis.43-45 Since metastatic recurrence of HR-positive
breast cancer is associated with high mortality, researchers
are constantly exploring new and more effective drugs targeting endocrine-related pathways in addition to standard
treatment regimens. According to the ATAC study, a 5-year AI
therapy signiﬁcantly increased DFS and decreased the chance
of recurrence compared to a 5-year tamoxifen treatment in
postmenopausal individuals (HR 0.81; 95% CI, 0.67–0.98;
P = 0.03), demonstrating the importance of AI as a standard
adjuvant therapy for postmenopausal early breast cancer.46 As
a result of intensive clinical research on CDK4/6 inhibitors for
early breast cancer, abemaciclib in combination with

Cancer Control

endocrine therapy was approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)for the adjuvant treatment of HRpositive, HER2-negative, node-positive, early breast cancer
patients at a high risk of recurrence and patients with a Ki-67
score ≥20%.47,48
The UNIRAD study assessed 2-year efﬁcacy of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor everolimus in
combination with adjuvant endocrine therapy vs endocrine
therapy alone (AI or tamoxifen based on physician’s choice) in
1278 patients with ER+/HER2-early breast cancer.49 The
study was suspended due to a high discontinuation rate of
53.4% in the everolimus group and 22.3% in the placebo
group, even before the ﬁrst planned interim analysis. This
emphasizes the necessity for drugs provided in combination
with endocrine therapy in patients with early breast cancer to
have long-term tolerability. An oral PI3Kα-selective inhibitor,
alpelisib, showed a 7.9-month numeric improvement in median OS when alpelisib was added to fulvestrant treatment in
PIK3CA-mutated, HR-positive, HER2-negative advanced
breast cancer patients in SOLAR-1 trial.50 Alpelisib in
combination with fulvestrant is the ﬁrst drug to be approved by
the FDA for the treatment of PIK3CA-mutated advanced or
metastatic breast cancer patients,51 and the efﬁcacy of alpelisib
in ER-positive early breast cancer patients remains to be
explored. CoopERA study, which provided the ﬁrst clinical
evidence of oral selective ER degraders (SERDs) in early ERpositive/HER2-negative breast cancer, compared giredestrant
with anastrozole in neoadjuvant settings. This study found
that, giredestrant treatment resulted in further reduction of
Ki67 expression from baseline compared to anastrozole
( 81%; 95% CI,
86%,
75% vs
74%; 95%
CI, 80%, 67%).52 Several large adjuvant trials comparing
oral SERDs with standard endocrine therapy have been
initiated.53,54 Superior clinical potential of these drugs will be
reﬂected by their rapid transition for the treatment of earlystage disease prior to approval of advanced breast cancer.
At the same time, the optimal regimens for applicable
population of endocrine therapy are constantly being explored. Results from an 8-year follow-up of the MINDACT
trial showed that, more locoregional recurrences and contralateral breast cancer were observed in patients with stage I
low-risk breast cancer who did not receive adjuvant endocrine
therapy (4.7% and 4.6% in patients receiving no adjuvant
systemic therapy vs 1.4% and 1.5% in patients receiving only
endocrine therapy). Overall, signiﬁcantly fewer breast cancer
events were observed in patients receiving adjuvant endocrine
therapy, although the effect of endocrine therapy on the distant
metastasis-free interval was limited. A recent propensitymatched study compared survival differences between patients with weakly ER-positive early breast cancer who did not
receive endocrine therapy and those who received 2–3 years or
5 years of endocrine therapy. No signiﬁcant differences in 5year DFS rates between the 2–3-year group and the 5-year
group were observed after a median follow-up of 65 months
(HR .82; 95% CI, .51–1.33; P = .43). Short-term adjuvant



endocrine therapy for 2–3 years may serve as an alternative to
the standard 5-year adjuvant endocrine therapy for patients
with weakly ER-positive early breast cancer.

HR-Positive/HER2-Positive Breast Cancer
HR-positive and HER2-positive breast cancer is a unique
subtype and differs from other subtypes in clinical behavior,
molecular function, signaling pathway, and treatment sensitivity. Optimal endocrine therapeutic approach for HRpositive/HER2-positive breast cancer remains controversial.57 The currently recommended adjuvant therapy for HRpositive/HER2-positive breast cancer is anti-HER2 targeted
therapy in combination with chemotherapy followed by endocrine therapy. The SYSUCC-002 trial studied the efﬁcacy
and safety of TH in combination with endocrine therapy or
chemotherapy as ﬁrst-line treatment in patients with HRpositive/HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. A median
progression-free survival (PFS) of 19.2 months (95% CI:
16.7–21.7) in the endocrine therapy arm and 14.8 months
(12.8–16.8) in the chemotherapy arm (hazard ratio of . 95%
CI: .71–1.09; P non-inferiority <.0001) was observed. Trastuzumab plus endocrine therapy was found to be non-inferior
to trastuzumab plus chemotherapy, and a signiﬁcantly higher
incidence of toxicity was observed in the chemotherapy arm
than the endocrine therapy arm.59 Still there is a lack of
relevant evidence on the adjuvant therapy of early breast
cancer, but for low-risk patients who do not need chemotherapy, or those who need chemotherapy but have issues in
tolerability, endocrine therapy in combination with targeted
therapy can be considered.

Adjuvant Bone-Modifying Agent
In recent years, the value of the third-generation bisphosphonates in bone protection and treatment of breast
cancer bone metastasis have been gradually explored. In 2022,
the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) introduced guidelines for adjuvant therapy of bone-modifying
agents in early breast cancer. It highlighted that, despite the
EBCTCG meta-analysis ﬁnding advantages for bisphosphonates in all subgroups of postmenopausal early
breast cancer patients, the beneﬁt was rather marginal.60
EBCTCG meta-analysis found highly signiﬁcant reductions
in recurrence (rate ratio [RR] 0.86; 95% CI 0.78–0.94; P =
0.002), distant recurrence (RR 0.82; 95% CI 0.74–0.92; P =
0.0003), bone recurrence (RR 0.72; 95% CI 0.60–086; P =
0.0002), and breast cancer mortality (RR 0.82; 95% CI 0.73–
0.93; P = 0.002) in postmenopausal women while in premenopausal women the treatment had no apparent effect on any
outcome.61 Basic studies have shown that bisphosphonates can
inhibit proliferation of breast cancer cells and induce apoptosis
and have anti-angiogenic properties in terms of anti-tumor
capacity, with direct anti-tumor effects.62-65 Of these, zoledronic acid was identiﬁed to be the most potent



bisphosphonate. Several studies have established the antitumor status of zoledronic acid in the treatment of early breast
cancer as it may reduce the risk of recurrence and improve OS.
Zoledronic acid was recommended by the 2022 ASCO
guidelines for adjuvant therapy in early breast cancer patients.
Regardless of molecular typing, anti-tumor effects of zoledronic acid in breast cancer patients have been demonstrated
by several randomized, open-label, phase III studies. The
ABCSG-12 trial enrolled 1800 premenopausal patients with
HR-positive early breast cancer who received zoledronic acid
combined with endocrine therapy. This trial showed an absolute increase in DFS rate of 3.4% (88.4% vs 85.0%), improved OS rate (96.7% vs 94.5%), and a 23% reduction in the
risk of relapse (HR = .77; 95% CI, .60–.99, P = .042), when
compared with endocrine therapy alone.67 The AZURE study
analyzed the efﬁcacy of zoledronic acid in combination with
adjuvant systemic therapy in 3360 women with breast cancer
(all molecular subtypes included). In postmenopausal patients,
systemic therapy combined with zoledronic acid reduced the
risk of disease recurrence by 18% (HR = .82; 95% CI, .67–
1.00), the risk of developing invasive disease by 22% (HR =
.78; 95% CI, .64–.94), and the risk of death by 31% (HR = .69;
95% CI, .50–.94; P = .019).68 The results of ZO-FAST study,
which enrolled 1065 HR-positive postmenopausal early breast
cancer patients, made comparative efﬁcacy evaluation between early zoledronic acid plus endocrine therapy and delayed zoledronic acid plus endocrine therapy. The ﬁndings
showed that the early use of zoledronic acid increased DFS
(HR = .66; 95% CI, .44–.97; P = .0375) and decreased the risk
of disease recurrence by 34% as compared to delayed use (P <
.05).69 SWOG S0307 showed no difference in efﬁcacy between oral clodronic acid and oral ibandronic acid with zoledronic acid in the adjuvant therapy of early breast cancer,
despite an increased rate of osteonecrosis of the jaw with
zoledronic acid.70
Studies exploring the efﬁcacy of denosumab, an antireceptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL)
monoclonal antibody, in the adjuvant therapy of breast cancer
have also reached the study endpoints in recent years. An international, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
phase III trial, D-CARE, enrolled 4509 breast cancer patients
to receive either denosumab (120 mg) or matching placebo,
starting with neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy. Primary
analysis showed that bone metastasis-free survival was not
signiﬁcantly different between the treatment groups. According
to this study, RANKL inhibition might delay bone metastases in
early breast cancer patients but did not enhance disease-related
outcomes for high-risk early breast cancer patients.71
Another prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled
phase III clinical study (ABCSG-18) explored the efﬁcacy
of denosumab in adjuvant settings for breast cancer. Longterm follow-up demonstrated that denosumab (60 mg) improved DFS and OS, with an absolute difference of 5.4% in
DFS at 11 years, and an improvement rate by 17% in risk of
progressive disease (HR = .83; 95% CI, .71–.97; P = .02),



compared to placebo. Further statistical analysis showed
signiﬁcant OS beneﬁt, with the risk of death decreased by 26%
(HR = .74; 95% CI, .58–.94; P = .013).52 Conﬂicting results of
these 2 studies call into question the anti-tumor efﬁcacy of
denosumab in early breast cancer patients. Therefore, denosumab is not currently recommended for adjuvant therapy of
early breast cancer and requires further evaluations.

Adjuvant Intensive Therapy Following
Neoadjuvant Therapy
Presence of residual disease after neoadjuvant therapy indicates
the existence of partial treatment resistance in the tumor. After
neoadjuvant therapy, achieving a pathologic complete response is
associated with better prognosis in breast cancer patients. Additional anti-cancer treatments might help breast cancer patients
with residual disease after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.72 Many
post-neoadjuvant therapy trials evaluating additional chemotherapy with different agents, bisphosphonates, and poly ADPribose polymerase inhibitors (PARPi) have been conducted.
Results of KATHERINE study revealed that 14 cycles of
adjuvant intensive T-DM1 therapy after surgery further improved iDFS in the T-DM1 group compared to the TH group
(88.3% vs 77.0%; HR = .50, 95% CI, .39–.64; P < .0001) in
HER2-positive breast cancer patients who did not achieve
pCR after neoadjuvant therapy.73 CREATE-X study showed
that postoperative administration of 6–8 cycles of capecitabine
could signiﬁcantly improve 5-year DFS and OS, with good
safety and tolerable toxicity in triple-negative breast cancer
patients failing to achieve pCR.74 The OlympiA study was
designed to evaluate the efﬁcacy and safety of olaparib and
placebo as adjuvant therapy after standard of care for patients
with germline BRCA (gBRCA)-mutated, HER2-negative
early breast cancer at a high risk for recurrence. Results revealed that adjuvant intensive therapy with olaparib signiﬁcantly improved 3-year distant DFS (87.5% vs 80.4%; P <
.001) and reduced mortality after 1 year (3.21% vs 4.68%; P =
.02).75 The interim analysis of KEYNOTE-522 revealed that
patients with triple-negative breast cancer who had been
treated with PD-1 inhibitors in the neoadjuvant settings, regardless of their pCR status after surgery, had a lower risk of
distant recurrence after continued use of PD-1 inhibitors for
1 year.76 DESTINY-Breast05 explored the efﬁcacy and safety
of ADC drug DS8201 vs T-DM1 in adjuvant intensive therapy
of HER2-positive breast cancer with neoadjuvant non-pCR,
with the primary endpoint of investigator-assessed IDFS.
Although the study is still ongoing, DS8201-based ADC drugs
have shown breakthrough efﬁcacy in the past. Hence, this
study is expected to show improvement in the cure rate and
further redeﬁne its standard of care for HER2-positive breast
cancer patients. Several interesting strategies are currently
being evaluated in the post-neoadjuvant setting and a precise
understanding on tumor characteristics will improve adjuvant
intensive therapy strategies.

Cancer Control

Future Prospects
Postoperative adjuvant therapy is a key part of the comprehensive breast cancer treatment. Standardized adjuvant therapy might help in the possibility of early breast cancer cure,
signiﬁcantly prolonging the survival time and reducing the
risk of recurrence. The commonly used anthracyclines for
adjuvant therapy serve potential survival beneﬁts for early
breast cancer patients but their long-term cytotoxicity led
researchers to seek alternative therapeutic approaches. Different treatment initiatives have been studied for different
breast cancer types. In the absence of standard chemotherapy
for HR-positive early breast cancer, dose-density chemotherapy has shown promise but the equilibrium between efﬁcacy and safety cannot be maintained, which poses a
concern. Meanwhile, targeted therapy with monoclonal antibody demonstrated equal as well as superior efﬁcacy and
safety.
Single and dual-targeted antibody therapies showed
promise in the last 2 decades and are also constantly
evolving. It also remains as a milestone in personalized
breast cancer treatment approaches. Endocrine therapy also
showed improved clinical outcomes which can be useful in
negating high-toxicity proﬁles of anthracyclines. Recently,
PARPi therapy exhibited signiﬁcant beneﬁts in postneoadjuvant intensive therapy settings. Consistent alternative measures have been taken so far in reducing the
toxicities by adjuvant chemotherapy using anthracyclines.
Hence, further studies should be encouraged to test the
clinical outcomes of anthracycline-free regimens including
different types of early breast cancer patients to identify
their beneﬁts and shortcomings. Moreover, studies on
personalized adjuvant treatment approaches using advanced diagnostic tools to accurately identify the breast
cancer type should be given additional consideration since
early breast cancer detection and clinical management are
highly important in eradicating further recurrences. With
the deeper scientiﬁc understanding on the mechanism of
breast cancer occurrence and development, and the continuous clinical trial investigations on new drugs and
treatment regimens, adjuvant therapy for breast cancer will
improve the therapeutic effect, thus bringing more survival
beneﬁts to early breast cancer patients.
