
We have reviewed the available clinical data on the benefit of axillary treatment in patients with early breast
cancer. The results of these studies suggest that perhaps 5-10% of patients are cured by effective axillary
treatment. We conclude that effective axillary treatment should still be considered an essential aspect of
primary treatment.

Treatment of the axilla in patients with early breast
cancer, once considered an essential part of primary therapy, has been recently questioned. In this
article we present a brief summary of theories of
breast cancer spread, and review data from studies
which evaluate the importance of axillary treatment in patients with early breast cancer. We present the view that there is currently insufficient data
to justify abandoning effective treatment of the
axilla in these patients.
Any discussion of the value of axillary treatment
must be related to an understanding of the spread
of breast cancer. Axillary treatment can only be of
survival value if the cancer spreads sequentially
from the breast to axillary nodes and finally to
distant sites, at least in some patients. If there is a
subset of patients with cancer confined to the
breast and axillary nodes, then axillary treatment
will be of value. Theories on the spread of breast
cancer have changed markedly since the early part
of this century when Samson Handley and, later,
William Halsted espoused the concept that breast

cancer spreads by direct extension of the primary. According to this view, metastasis to the axillary lymph nodes, bones, and liver all occur sequentially by direct permeation of breast cancer cells.
This concept of spread by permeation was used to
provide a rationale for the radical mastectomy, an
en-bloc resection of the breast with both the major
and minor pectoral muscles and the axillary lymph
nodes.
By the 1930's, however, the prevailing view that
breast cancer spreads by direct permeation of tumor cells had been abandoned and replaced by the
concept of noncontiguous spread by embolization.
Initial pathological studies on breast cancer spread
had used specimens from patients with locally advanced and terminal breast cancer and revealed
continuous involvement (or permeation) of the
lymphatics. Later studies using specimens from patients with early breast cancer rarely disclosed such
lymphatic permeation. More commonly, emboli of
cancer cells were seen in the lymphatic channels or
in the draining lymph nodes. Studies of this kind



led to the conclusion that breast cancer spreads to
draining lymph nodes by embolization rather than
permeation. Nevertheless, the theory that breast
cancer spreads sequentially remained.
In the last two decades, the concept of sequential
spread has been questioned. One major argument
against the concept of sequential spread is the clinical observation that approximately 25 % of patients
with histologically negative axillary nodes develop
distant metastases. In these patients, the cancer
apparently has spread directly from the primary to
distant sites without involvement of the axillary
nodes. It has been suggested that in these patients,
the cancer may have drained to the internal mammary nodes, an alternative site of regional lymph
node involvement. Multiple studies, however,
have revealed that treating the internal mammary
nodes by surgery or radiation therapy did not eliminate these distant metastases. Another attempt
was made to bolster the sequential theory by suggesting that, in patients with distant relapse, some
lymph nodes which were considered negative by
routine pathological examination in fact contained
small amounts of breast cancer when subjected to
more careful scrutiny. Those studies, however,
failed to show that such small nodal deposits of
breast cancer predicted for distant relapse.
It now seems well-documented that, in some patients, breast cancer does not spread sequentially
through the axillary lymph nodes to distant sites,
but directly from the primary by way of the blood
stream or by traversing the lymph nodes without
implantation. This observation, however, does not
eliminate the possibility that breast cancer does
spread sequentially in some patients.
The results of the National Surgical Adjuvant
Breast Project (NSABP) Study B-04 have been
used to provide the strongest evidence against the
sequential theory of breast cancer spread. In this
study, breast cancer patients without clinically-suspicious axillary lymph nodes were randomized to
one of three treatment arms: 1) radical mastectomy, 2) total mastectomy and postoperative radiation to the chest wall and draining lymph node
areas, and 3) total mastectomy alone. This study
tested the value of axillary treatment, since arms 1
and 2 provided treatment to the axilla and arm 3 did

not. The first report was published in 1977 and
provided two lines of evidence that axillary treatment was not valuable. It was observed in this
study that 38.6% of the patients randomized to
radical mastectomy had histologically positive
nodes. Since patients were randomly allocated to
treatment, it is assumed that a similar percentage of
patients randomized to total mastectomy alone had
occult axillary metastases. It was noted, however,
that only 15% of patients treated by total mastectomy alone subsequently developed axillary nodes
requiring dissection during the observation period.
These data were interpreted as indicating that occult breast cancer in axillary lymph nodes does not
always progress. The other line of evidence was the
observation that failure to provide effective treatment to the axilla was not associated with an increased risk of distant relapse or death due to
breast cancer. The outcome for patients treated
with total mastectomy alone was comparable to
that for patients treated by radical mastectomy or
total mastectomy and radiation.
The results of this NSABP trial have had such a
maj or impact on the philosophy of treatment of the
axilla that we will examine this trial in greater
detail. The original report published in 1977 acknowledged that 35% of the patients assigned to
total mastectomy, in fact, had a limited axillary
dissection. A second report, published in 1981,
indicated that the proportion of patients assigned
to total mastectomy alone who subsequently required an axillary dissection was related to the
extent of the initial axillary dissection. Twenty-one
percent of the patients who had no nodes recovered
subsequently required axillary dissections compared to 12% for patients who had 1-5 nodes recovered, and 0% for patients who had six or more
nodes recovered. These results indicate that 21%,
rather than 16%, of patients actually treated by
total mastectomy alone subsequently required an
axillary dissection.
In analyzing the results of the NSABP B-04 trial,
we believe that it is important to distinguish between the questions, 'How often do occult axillary
metastases progress?' and 'How often do occult
axillary metastases progress to require treatment?'
The NSABP trial addressed the latter question

Patients with early breast cancer benefit from effective axillary treatment
only. To answer the first question, it is necessary to
consider patients who develop suspicious axillary
lymphadenopathy simultaneously with or subsequent to the appearance of distant metastases.
Such patients obviously do not require an axillary
dissection, but do have progression of occult axillary metastases. The NSABP reports do not provide
the proportion of patients who developed suspicious axillary lymph nodes simultaneously with
or subsequent to distant relapse. It is assumed that
patients who develop axillary lymphadenopathy as
the first sign of relapse following total mastectomy
undergo a metastatic workup prior to axillary dissection. If distant relapse is noted on this workup,
an axillary dissection probably would not be required. Based on our own experience, we would
estimate that an additional 3-5% of patients present with simultaneous axillary and distant relapse.
Estimating the frequency that patients develop axillary lymphadenopathy after distant relapse is difficult since record keeping with regard to asymptomatic findings is often inadequate in patients
with distant metastases. An estimate of another
3-5% is probably a conservative one. Using these
estimates, of the presumed 38% who had occult
axillary metastases and did not have any initial
axillary dissection, we calculate that 21% + 4% +
4% -- 29% progress to develop axillary lymphadenopathy. This represents 76% of the total presumed to have axillary involvement. This percentage would be further increased by using an
actuarial calculation which adjusts for patients who
die too quickly to manifest axillary lymphadenopathy. In summary, we conclude that, in the large
majority of patients treated by total mastectomy
alone, occult axillary breast cancer progresses.
The second major finding of the NSABP B-04
trial which we will examine in greater detail is that
axillary treatment, either surgical or radiotherapeutic, did not result in any advantage in freedom
from distant relapse or survival. Before accepting
this conclusion, it is important to ask whether or
not enough patients were included in the study.
Approximately 360 patients were assigned to each
treatment arm. It is clear that the value of axillary
treatment is restricted to patients who have positive nodes. Patients with negative axillary nodes



cannot benefit from axillary treatment. As a result,
the critical population is, therefore, restricted to
the 137 patients (38.6% of 360) who are presumed
to have positive axillary nodes. It is also clear that
axillary treatment is not of value in patients who
have occult distant disease at the time of presentation. It is well known that only one-quarter of
patients with positive axillary nodes are free of
occult distant disease. Therefore, the critical
population is further restricted to one-quarter of
137, or 34 patients who have positive nodes and no
occult distant spread and could therefore benefit
from axillary treatment. In addition, one must consider the salvage potential of delayed axillary treatment. If one estimates that one-quarter of patients
initially treated by total mastectomy alone who
subsequently develop axillary adenopathy are curable, then delayed axillary dissection cures an additional 8 patients. This leaves 26 patients who
could possibly have benefited from initial axillary
treatment, or 7% of the total group. It is important
to note that in order to have a 90% chance of
detecting a 7% difference between 2 treatment
arms of a clinical trial at a statistically significant
level of p = 0.05, 2000 patients are required.
We conclude from this analysis that the negative
result obtained in the B-04 study does not prove
that axillary treatment is of no value, but rather,
that the number of patients who might benefit is
small.
There are other studies that can be quoted relative to the survival benefit associated with effective
axillary treatment, but they are limited by either
small numbers of patients or short follow-up time.
In the second series of the trial performed at Guy's
Hospital between 1971 and 1975, 253 patients
with Stage I (clinically negative axillary lymph
nodes) breast cancer were randomized to either
radical mastectomy (RM) or wide local excision
(WLE). Patients treated by WLE did not undergo
an axillary dissection. Both groups received
postoperative radiation therapy with a dose and
technique which are now considered inadequate.
As a result, there was an excess of axillary recurrences in the WLE group compared to the RM
group. At eight years, there was a highly statistically significant difference in both distant recur-



rence and survival in favor of patients treated by
radical mastectomy. In the Southeast Scotland
Trial, 275 Stage I patients with localized breast
cancer were randomly assigned to either radical
mastectomy (RM) or total mastectomy and radiation (TM + XRT). Axillary treatment by radiation
appeared to be relatively ineffective since recurrence in the axilla was noted in 14% of patients
treated by TM + XRT, compared to 1% for RM
patients. As in the Guy's Hospital trial, the incidence of chest wall recurrence was not significantly
different between the two arms. The 10 year survival rates show a statistically significant advantage
for patients treated by RM compared to those
treated by TM + XRT. The results from these 2
smaller studies suggest that effective axillary treatment is important for survival. In the study conducted by the Cancer Research Campaign (CRC)
2,243 evaluable patients with stage I and II breast
cancer were randomized to total mastectomy and
postoperative radiation therapy (TM + XRT) or
TM alone. The five year results indicated that
there is a significant improvement in local-regional
control for the TM + XRT treatment group (89%
versus 70%) but not a significant improvement in
survival (73% versus 70%). These preliminary results suggest that axillary treatment does not have
survival benefit, but further follow-up is required.
It is of interest in this regard that in the Southeast
Scotland trial, the five year survival rates were not
different. It was only at 10 years that a difference
emerged.
In considering the value of axillary treatment, we
would like to stress the observation that patients
with documented axillary metastases apparently
have been cured following axillary treatment. As
noted above, approximately one quarter of nodepositive patients treated by effective therapy remain free of recurrence for long periods of time and
can be considered cured. We believe this observation provides the strongest prima facie evidence
that breast cancer spreads sequentially in some
patients. Until proven otherwise, it must be assumed that ineffective treatment to the axilla
would result in residual cancer, and that in most
cases this cancer would progress to be fatal. The
analysis presented here indicates that the percen-

tage of patients who might benefit from effective
axillary treatment is small, since in the large majority of patients, axillary treatment is either not
needed, to no avail, or could have been used
equally well at a later time. It is also likely that the
effect on survival may not become apparent for
many years. Nevertheless, we conclude that effective axillary treatment is likely to result in a survival
benefit to a small percentage of patients (approximately 5-10%) with early breast cancer.
Finally, it is worthwhile to consider what constitutes effective axillary treatment. It is now generally accepted that resection of the pectoral muscles is not required for effective surgical treatment.
A thorough dissection with preservation of the pectoral muscle does have the potential of leaving
nodal tissue behind in the upper-most portion of
the axilla and between the pectoral muscles.
Haagensen, however, was the first to show that
when the upper-most portion of the axilla (the
subclavicular region or Level III) is involved, survival following radical mastectomy is essentially
zero. Auchincloss amplified that observation
to show that too few people benefited from radical
mastectomy to justify the sacrifice of the pectoral
muscles. The data from Haagensen also indicates that only 3 of 182 patients (2%) had isolated
involvement of interpectoral nodes and survived
free of disease for 10 years or greater. Axillary
failure following a thorough dissection with preservation of the pectoral muscles is rare.
Comparative studies, including the NSABP
B-04 trial, have shown that axillary dissection and
properly-delivered radiation therapy to the axilla
(4500-5000 rad in 5 weeks) provide comparable
levels of tumor control. The major advantage of
axillary dissection is the opportunity to determine
the histological status of those nodes for purposes
of estimating prognosis and determining the need
for adjuvant systemic therapy.
The analysis presented here suggests that axillary treatment is of survival benefit to a small group
of patients with early breast cancer. A thorough
axillary dissection without pectoral muscle resection is a well-tolerated procedure with little morbidity and insures an optimum level of cure for
patients with early breast cancer. Effective axillary

Patients with early breast cancer benefit from effective axillary treatment
treatment should still be considered an essential
aspect of the primary treatment of early breast
cancer.
