

Abstract
The clinical and pathological features of 51 patients who
survived for more than 20 years after diagnosis of cancer
of the breast were compared with those of 176 contemporaries who died within 20 years after diagnosis.
Of those who survived, 18 (35%) had had pathologically
affected axillary nodes compared with at least 86 (49%)
of those who died. Also, 11 (21%) of the survivors had
had small tumours compared with 10 (6%) of those who
died. Pathological review of tumours in the survivors
showed 40 (78%) to have been infiltrating ductal
carcinomas, of which 13 (32%) were grade 3 lesions.
These differences between the two groups were largely
due to the prognostic value of these variables in the first
five years after diagnosis. After a patient had survived
five years the major prognostic variables were of little
value in the prediction of which patients would be cured
of breast cancer. Advanced age, which was of little
prognostic value in the first five years after diagnosis,
was of significant prognostic value in the longer term,
partly due to the steep age gradient for mortality from
other diseases. Nevertheless, seven of 19 deaths more than
20 years after first treatment were due to breast cancer.
Late deaths from breast cancer may, however, have
often been the result of metastases from second primaries rather than the late manifestationof micrometastases
from the original primary carcinoma.
Age, menstrual state, clinical stage, and axillary nodes
being affected are thus of some prognostic value in
cancer of the breast, but the present inadequacy of
knowledge of the behaviour of the disease makes accurate
prediction of which patients will be cured impossible.

On reviewing the original histological slides we found that three
survivors had had benign lesions (sclerosing papilloma, epithelial
hyperplasia, and sclerosing adenosis). They were excluded from the
study. We also excluded nine patients with in situ carcinomas. This
left a total study population of 227 patients with histologically confirmed invasive breast cancer (tumour node metastasis (TNM) stages
1,2,3) who were treated in this unit from 1 January 1939 to 31 December 1961. From the unit's notes we sought age at diagnosis, duration of
symptoms, stage and location of tumour, family history, method of
treatment, duration of survival, and cause of death. In addition,
details of menstrual state at diagnosis, marital state, and parity were
obtained. Menstrual state was deemed to be unknown in those who
had had a hysterectomy and were aged under 55. In patients who had
survived 20 years the original pathological slides were reviewed to
confirm the diagnosis, type the tumour, and grade the infiltrating
ductal carcinomas, using the system devised by Bloom and Richardson.2
Standard life table methods were used in the analysis in addition
to Student's t test and Yates's corrected x2 values for 2 x 2 tables.
In life table analyses with three or more groups all x2 values are for
trend across group and should be referred to the x2 distribution with
one degree of freedom.3 No allowance for natural mortality was
made in computing expected values.

Introduction

Results

Cancer of the breast, unlike many other forms of cancer, may
result in metastasis decades after the original diagnosis
and treatment. Brinkley and Haybittle have, however, shown
that the subgroup of women who remain free from the disease
for 20 years after treatment have a subsequent survival that is
similar to that of a normal population matched for age.1 This
suggests that the disease has been eradicated in most patients
within this group. Nevertheless, despite the survival curves
being apparently parallel, the women in the "cured" cohort
still have a greatly increased risk of dying of breast cancer
when compared with the normal population.
We analysed the records of all patients with clinically nondisseminated invasive cancer of the breast at first presentation
who had received their primary treatment from this unit before
31 December 1961. Complete follow up was available for all

Of the 227 patients, 51 (220 0) survived for more than 20 years
from the date of first treatment. Seven of these 51 patients, however,
subsequently developed a recurrence or died of breast cancer more
than 20 years after treatment. Of the 176 who died within 20 years,
26 had apparently done so from causes other than breast cancer
without evidence of recurrence, but we did not attempt in the analyses
below to separate these women from those who died of breast cancer.
As table I shows, more of the survivors at 20 years had had tumours
at clinical stage 1 and a greater proportion of those who died had had
lesions at stage 3 (X2 =916; p=0 002). Interestingly, however, 10
(200') of the survivors had presented with stage 3 tumours. Most of
the prognostic importance of clinical stage was associated with nodal
state, and a more careful examination of this factor 
showed that clinical nodal state was an important predictor of survival
to five years (p <0 00001) but that it was of no value whatsoever after

recur or

these patients. Information was sought concerning the clinical
and pathological features of each patient so that a comparison
could be made between the group who survived for more than
20 years without recurrence or metastasis and those who died
before this time. The object of the study was to identify those
features observable at first presentation that predicted a
favourable long term prognosis. In addition, the value of known
"short term" prognostic indicators in predicting long term
survival was also assessed.
Patients and methods

A similar but less striking picture was seen when size of tumour
was considered (fig 2 and table II). This also had a considerable
effect in predicting survival in the first five yers after diagnosis
(x2 =43; p<O-OOO1). A smaller effect was seen from five to 10 years
after first treatment (X2 =8 16; p =0 0003), and the association was no
longer significant from 10 to 20 years (X2=-15; not significant) and
was non-existent after 20 or more years (x2 =0 01; not significant).
A different pattern of time dependence was seen for age. At first
presentation the average age of the survivors was 47 7 years compared
with 53-2 for those who died within 20 years. The difference of 5-5
years was significant (t =3495; p =00007). In contrast with nodal
state and size of tumour, the effect of age became manifest only on
long term follow up (fig 3, table II). Age at diagnosis had no material
effect on survival in the first five years, a weak and non-significant
effect after five to 10 years (X2= 106; p=0-15), but a strong effect
after 10 to 20 years (x2 =1314; p=00003). No further effect was
seen after 20 years but this may have been due to the small numbers.
Results of histological examination of axillary lymph nodes were
available for 48 (94%) of the survivors. Of these, 18 (35%) had had
confirmed metastatic tumour within the lymph nodes. In contrast,
axillary lymph node state was known in 125 of 133 women who had
been treated by radical mastectomy and died within 20 years. Lymph
nodes were pathologically affected in 86 (49°h) of these 176 women

(XI 12=90; p=0 0004). This was almost certainly an underestimate
of the number of women who died in whom axillary nodes were
affected as in most patients not receiving radical mastectomy the
nodes were irradiated and not removed because the tumours were
advanced.
Of the survivors, five (10%) had a first degree relative with breast
cancer compared with 22 (13%) of those who died (X2=0-08; not
significant), suggesting that a genetic predisposition did not enhance
or diminish the probability of long term survival.
We assessed the effect of a history of previous breast surgery for
non-malignant disorders. Preceding benign breast disease had been
diagnosed in three survivors (6%) and 18 (10%) of those who died
(X2=0 45) and thus did not have a significant prognostic effect.
Tables III, IV, V, and VI show, respectively, methods of treatment,
duration of symptoms before first presentation to the clinic, location
of primary tumours, and histological type and grade of tumour for
those who survived and those who died within 20 years. None of
these variables differed significantly between the two groups.
Of the patients who survived, 35 (69%) had been premenopausal at
presentation compared with 71 (40%) of those who died (X2= 116;
p= 00006). When the survivors were subdivided, on the basis of
their menopausal state, there was a similar distribution of clinical and
pathological stages among those who were premenopausal and those
who were postmenopausal. Furthermore, grades of tumour were
similarly equally distributed between the two subgroups. Stages of
tumour were also equally divided among premenopausal and postmenopausal women who died. Although premenopausal patients may
develop tumours that are intrinsically less malignant, or possibly may
mount a more effective host response to their tumours, the above

Our study showed that 51 (22%) of this unit's patients with
clinically localised invasive breast cancers survived for 20 years
from the time of diagnosis. Their survival was not related to
the site of the tumour, duration of symptoms, previous benign
breast disease, family history, parity, or lactation. Although
size of tumour and axillary nodal state were significant prognostic
variables, their contribution was almost completely confined to
prediction of survival for five years. Thereafter, these variables
did not affect survival, so that one quarter of the long term
survivors had tumours greater than 5 cm in diameter and one
third had pathologically affected axillary nodes. In addition,
grade of tumour did not appear to be a long term prognostic
indicator as 13 (25%) of the survivors had grade 3 infiltrating
ductal carcinomas compared with 43 (24%) of those who died.
The age and menstrual state of the patient at presentation
had a prognostic value independent of tumour stage and grade.
Although premenopausal patients may develop tumours that
are intrinsically less malignant or possibly mount a more
effective response to their tumour, these differences were more
likely to have been due to natural mortality, as the importance
of age manifests itself 10 years or more after the initial diagnosis.
Similar findings were reported in the studies of Langlands and
Kerr5 and of Pocock et al,6 who analysed the survival of 3878
patients treated by simple mastectomy and radiotherapy. When
cases were subdivided by clinical stage and size of tumour there
was a non-proportional hazard with time, resulting in a decay
of the prognostic ability of clinical stage.
Our findings refute the hypothesis that there are two distinct
variants of breast cancer-namely, one that remains locally

invasive and another that metastasises and is therefore incurable 7
18 (350o) of our survivors had had histologically confirmed
axillary metastases. Adair also reported a 300o incidence of
axillary nodes being affected in cured patients.8 Trials of
aggressive treatment to the axilla either by surgery or radiotherapy do not, however, suggest that this substantially affects
survival, at least over the short term.
None of the survivors had received any form of systemic
adjuvant treatment-that is, no attempt had been made to
destroy putative micrometastases. The non-appearance of
clinical metastases during the ensuing 20 years of complete
follow up suggested that axillary metastases were not invariably
associated with dissemination of disease. Based on our figures,
if entry to trials of adjuvant cytotoxic chemotherapy had been
dictated by the presence of axillary node metastases (found in

-as

concentration was raised at 3-92 mmol/I (15-7 mg/100 ml), fell transiently
after treatment with intravenous saline, but rose again to 3-66 mmol/l
(14-6 mg/100 ml) despite continuous rehydration for 19 days.
Case 2-A 32 year old woman underwent renal transplantation three
months before presentation. Radiographs and serum alkaline phosphatase
activity showed no evidence of bone disease, but 14 months previously she
had received lax-hydroxycholecalciferol for hyperparathyroid bone disease.
Renal function was stable (creatinine clearance 38 ml/min), and immunosuppression was maintained with azathioprine and prednisolone. One
month after transplantation she developed cough and dyspnoea, subsequently
attributed to cytomegalovirus infection, and required assisted ventilation for
four weeks. She then developed a generalised grade II limb weakness due
to a peripheral motor neuropathy. Power returned gradually over the
subsequent two months, but serum calcium concentration rose to 3-54
mmol/l (14 mg/100 ml) despite adequate hydration and treatment with
prednisolone (10 mg daily).
In both patients serum immunoreactive parathyroid hormone was
undetectable (<40 pg/ml) and the concentration of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol was low (21 pmol/l (8-2 pg/ml) and 42 pmol/l (16-9 pg/ml)
respectively; normal 45-138 pmol/l (18-55 pg/ml)). Both patients had
biochemical evidence of increased bone resorption as judged by high ratios
of fasting urinary calcium to creatinine concentrations (figure) and of
hydroxyproline to creatinine concentrations (374 and 83-3 mmol/mol
(434 and 97 mg/g) respectively (normal 10-30 mmol/mol (12-35 mg/g)).
Both patients were treated with clodronate and became normocalcaemic
within five days (figure). When treatment was stopped after five days in
case 2 the hypercalcaemia recurred, but it responded to further treatment.
Fasting urinary calcium excretion, initially high in both patients, fell to
normal within two weeks after the start of treatment. In case 1 both serum
calcium concentration and fasting urinary calcium excretion rose transiently
when clodronate was stopped after one month of treatment. Urinary
hydroxyproline excretion was initially unchanged but fell gradually to
normal after three months in both patients.

Comment
It is not clear whether the increasing mobility of our two patients
may in some way have triggered their hypercalcaemia. Serum
concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol were low, suggesting
that intestinal absorption of calcium was also low. The undetectable
concentrations of immunoreactive parathyroid hormone excluded
hyperparathyroidism as a cause for the hypercalcaemia.
Both patients had biochemical evidence of increased bone
resorption, and in both creatinine clearance was impaired. Impairment
of renal function would not cause, but is likely to contribute to,
hypercalcaemia, and in both cases appreciable bone resorption
appeared to be the major mechanism for hypercalcaemia. These
conclusions are supported by the response of these patients to
clodronate. This agent has been previously used in Paget's disease
and hypercalcaemic disorders associated with increased bone
resorption.4 The effects of clodronate in immobilisation hypercalcaemia
have not been reported previously, although the drug inhibits bone
loss after immobilisation in experimental animals and in paraplegia.
Plasma calcium concentration and fasting urinary calcium excretion
decreased in both our patients, indicating the efficacy of treatment.
The diphosphonate etidronate is also effective,5 but its action to


104 of the 173 patients for whom histological data were available)
18 patients (17%) would have received unnecessary treatment.
In contrast, of the 69 patients known to have had unaffected
axillary nodes 39 (570%') died in the subsequent 20 years.
Interestingly, five (10%) of the so called "cured group" died
of metastases after developing contralateral breast cancer more
than 20 years after first treatment. Although there is no firm
evidence to support this, many late deaths from breast cancer
may possibly be the result of new tumours rather than a late
manifestation of slow growing micrometastases.
Our results indicate that, although age, menstrual state,
clinical stage, and spread to axillary nodes are of some prognostic
value in breast cancer, the present inadequacy of knowledge of
the behaviour of the disease makes accurate prediction of which
patients will be cured impossible.

